FUNDAMENTALS OF
PHOTONICS
Third Edition
B. E. A. Saleh
M. C. Teich
Wiley Series in Pure and Applied Optics
G. Boreman, Editor


FUNDAMENTALS OF
PHOTONICS


FUNDAMENTALS OF
PHOTONICS

THIRD EDITION

BAHAA E. A. SALEH

University of Central Florida

Boston University

MALVIN CARL TEICH

Boston University

Columbia University

WILEY

This edition first published 2019

© 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain
permission to reuse material from this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.

The rights of Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich to be identified as the authors of the editorial material in this work have
been asserted in accordance with law.

Registered Office

John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA

Eattorial Office

111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA

For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley products visit us at
www.wiley.com.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some content that appears in standard
print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty

In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of
information relating to the use of experimental reagents, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the
information provided in the package insert or instructions for each chemical, piece of equipment, reagent, or device for, among
other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. While the publisher
and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives, written sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that an organization, website, or
product is referred to in this work as a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher
and authors endorse the information or services the organization, website, or product may provide or recommendations it may
make. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. The advice
and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a specialist where appropriate.
Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work
was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial
damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.

Volume Set ISBN: 9781119506874

Volume | ISBN: 9781119506867

Volume II ISBN: 9781119506898

Cover design by Wiley

Cover image: Courtesy of B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich

Printed in the United States of America

10987654321

ee
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION xi
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION хх
PREFACE ТО THE FIRST EDITION Xxiii
PART |: OPTICS 1

1 ВАУ оОРТС$ 3
1.1 Postulates of Ray Optics 5

1.2 Simple Optical Components 8

1.3 Graded-Index Optics 20

1.4 Matrix Optics 27
Reading List 37

Problems 38

2 WAVE OPTICS 41
2.1  Postulates of Wave Optics 43

2.2 Monochromatic Waves 44

*2.3 Relation Between Wave Optics and Ray Optics 52

2.4 Simple Optical Components 53

2.5 Interference 61

2.6 Polychromatic and Pulsed Light 71
Reading List 76

Problems 77

3 BEAMOPTICS 79
3.1 The Gaussian Beam 80

3.2 Transmission Through Optical Components 91

3.3 Hermite-Gaussian Beams 99

3.4 Laguerre—Gaussian Beams 102

3.5 Nondiffracting Beams 105
Reading List 108

Problems 108

4 FOURIER OPTICS 110
4.1 Propagation of Light in Free Space 113

4.2 Optical Fourier Transform 124

4.3 Diffraction of Light 129

4.4 Image Formation 137

4.5 Holography 147
Reading List 155

Problems 157

У

vi CONTENTS
5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS 160
5.1 Electromagnetic Theory of Light 162
5.2 Electromagnetic Waves in Dielectric Media 166
5.3 Monochromatic Electromagnetic Waves 172
5.4 Elementary Electromagnetic Waves 175
5.5 Absorption and Dispersion 181
5.6 Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves 192
5.7 Pulse Propagation in Dispersive Media 199
Reading List 205
Problems 207
6 POLARIZATION OPTICS 209
6.1 Polarization of Light 211
6.2 Reflection and Refraction 221
6.3 Optics of Anisotropic Media 227
6.4 Optical Activity and Magneto-Optics 240
6.5 Optics of Liquid Crystals 244
6.6 Polarization Devices 247
Reading List 251
Problems 252
7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS 255
7.1. Optics of Dielectric Layered Media 258
7.2 One-Dimensional Photonic Crystals 277
7.3 Two- and Three-Dimensional Photonic Crystals 291
Reading List 299
Problems 301
8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS 303
8.1 Single- and Double-Negative Media 306
8.2 Metal Optics: Plasmonics 320
8.3 Metamaterial Optics 334
*8.4 Transformation Optics 343
Reading List 349
Problems 351
9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS 353
9.1 Planar-Mirror Waveguides 355
9.2 Planar Dielectric Waveguides 363
9.3 Two-Dimensional Waveguides 372
9.4 Optical Coupling in Waveguides 376
9.5 Photonic-Crystal Waveguides 385
9.6 Plasmonic Waveguides 386
Reading List 389
Problems 389
10 FIBER oPTics 391
10.1 Guided Rays 393
10.2 Guided Waves 397
10.3 Attenuation and Dispersion 415
10.4 Holey and Photonic-Crystal Fibers 426
10.5 Fiber Materials 429
Reading List 430
Problems 432

CONTENTS vii

11 RESONATOR OPTICS 433
11.1 Planar-Mirror Resonators 436

11.2 Spherical-Mirror Resonators 447

11.3 Two- and Three-Dimensional Resonators 459

11.4 Microresonators and Nanoresonators 463
Reading List 470

Problems 471

1 2 STATISTICAL OPTICS 473
12.1 Statistical Properties of Random Light 475

12.2 Interference of Partially Coherent Light 489

*12.3 Transmission of Partially Coherent Light 497

12.4 Partial Polarization 506
Reading List 510

Problems 512

13 PHOTON ОРТС$ 514
13.1 The Photon 516

13.2 Photon Streams 529

*13.3 Quantum States of Light 541
Reading List 550

Problems 554

PART Il: PHOTONICS 559

14 LIGHT AND MATTER 561
14.1 Energy Levels 562

14.2 Occupation of Energy Levels 581

14.3 Interactions of Photons with Atoms 583

14.4 Thermal Light 602

14.5 Luminescence and Scattering 607
Reading List 614

Problems 617

1 5 LASER AMPLIFIERS 619
15.1 Theory of Laser Amplification 622

15.2 Amplifier Pumping 626

15.3 Representative Laser Amplifiers 636

15.4 Amplifier Nonlinearity 645

*15.5 Amplifier Noise 651
Reading List 653

Problems 655

16 LASERS 657
16.1 Theory of Laser Oscillation 659

16.2 Characteristics of the Laser Output 666

16.3 Types of Lasers 680

16.4 Pulsed Lasers 707
Reading List 723

Problems 728

viii © CONTENTS
17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS 731
17.1 Semiconductors 733
17.2 Interactions of Photons with Charge Carriers 766
Reading List 782
Problems 784
18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES 787
18.1 Light-Emitting Diodes 789
18.2 Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers 817
18.3 Laser Diodes 831
18.4 Quantum-Confined Lasers 844
18.5 Microcavity Lasers 854
18.6 Nanocavity Lasers 862
Reading List 864
Problems 868
19 PHOTODETECTORS 871
19.1 Photodetectors 873
19.2 Photoconductors 883
19.3 Photodiodes 887
19.4 Avalanche Photodiodes 895
19.5 Array Detectors 907
19.6 Noise in Photodetectors 909
Reading List 935
Problems 938
20 AcousTo-oPTics 943
20.1 Interaction of Light and Sound 945
20.2 Acousto-Optic Devices 958
*20.3 Acousto-Optics of Anisotropic Media 967
Reading List 972
Problems 972
21 > ELECTRO-OPTICS 975
21.1 Principles of Electro-Optics 977
*21.2 Electro-Optics of Anisotropic Media 989
21.3 Electro-Optics of Liquid Crystals 996
*21.4 Photorefractivity 1005
21.5 Electroabsorption 1010
Reading List 1012
Problems 1013
22 NONLINEAR OPTICS 1015
22.1 Nonlinear Optical Media 1017
22.2 Second-Order Nonlinear Optics 1021
22.3 Third-Order Nonlinear Optics 1036
*22.4 Second-Order Nonlinear Optics: Coupled Waves 1047
*22.5 Third-Order Nonlinear Optics: Coupled Waves 1059
*22.6 Anisotropic Nonlinear Media 1066
*22.7 Dispersive Nonlinear Media 1069
Reading List 1074
Problems 1075

CONTENTS ix

23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS 1078
23.1 Pulse Characteristics 1079

23.2 Pulse Shaping and Compression 1088

23.3 Pulse Propagation in Optical Fibers 1102

23.4 Ultrafast Linear Optics 1115

23.5 Ultrafast Nonlinear Optics 1126

23.6 Pulse Detection 1146
Reading List 1159

Problems 1161

24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES 1163
24.1 Optical Interconnects 1166

24.2 Passive Optical Routers 1178

24.3 Photonic Switches 1187

24.4 Photonic Logic Gates 1211
Reading List 1220

Problems 1222

25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS 1224
25.1 Fiber-Optic Components 1226

25.2 Optical Fiber Communication Systems 1238

25.3 Modulation and Multiplexing 1257

25.4 Coherent Optical Communications 1266

25.5 Fiber-Optic Networks 1274
Reading List 1281

Problems 1284

А FOURIER TRANSFORM 1287
A.1 One-Dimensional Fourier Transform 1287

А.2 Time Duration and Spectral Width 1290

A.3 Two-Dimensional Fourier Transform 1293
Reading List 1295

B LINEAR SYSTEMS 1296
B.1 One-Dimensional Linear Systems 1296

B.2 Two-Dimensional Linear Systems 1299
Reading List 1300

С MODES OF LINEAR SYSTEMS 1301
Reading List 1305
SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1306
AUTHORS 1331
INDEX 1333


ees
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

Since the publication of the Second Edition in 2007, Fundamentals of Photonics has
maintained its worldwide prominence as a self-contained, up-to-date, introductory-
level textbook that features a blend of theory and applications. It has been reprinted
dozens of times and been translated into German and Chinese, as well as Czech and
Japanese. The Third Edition incorporates many of the scientific and technological
developments in photonics that have taken place in the past decade and strives to be
cutting-edge.

Optics and Photonics

Before usage of the term photonics became commonplace at the time of the First
Edition in the early 1990s, the field was characterized by a collection of appella-
tions that were not always clearly delineated. Terms such as quantum electronics,
optoelectronics, electro-optics, and lightwave technology were widely used. Though
there was a lack of agreement about the precise meanings of these terms, there was
nevertheless a vague consensus regarding their usage. Most of these terms have since
receded from general use, although some have retained their presence in the titles of
technical journals and academic courses.

Now, more than 25 years later, the term Optics along with the term Photonics, as
well as their combination Optics & Photonics, have prevailed. The distinction between
optics and photonics remains somewhat fuzzy, however, and there is a degree of overlap
between the two arenas. Hence, there is some arbitrariness in the manner in which
the chapters of this book are allocated to its two volumes, Part I: Optics and Part IT:
Photonics. From a broad perspective, the term Optics is taken to signify free-space and
guided-wave propagation, and to include topics such as interference, diffraction, imag-
ing, statistical optics, and photon optics. The term Photonics, in contrast, is understood
to include topics that rely on the interaction of light and matter, and is dedicated to
the study of devices and systems. As the miniaturization of components and systems
continues to progress and foster emerging technologies such as nanophotonics and
biophotonics, the importance of photonics continues to advance.

Printed and Electronic Versions
The Third Edition appears in four versions:

1. A printed version.

2. An eBook in the form of an ePDF file that mimics the printed version.

3. An eBook in the form of a standard ePUB.

4. An eBook in the form of an enhanced ePUB with animations for selected figures.
In its printed form, the text consists of two volumes, each of which contains the
Table of Contents and Index for both volumes along with the Appendices and List
of Symbols:

= Part I: Optics, contains the first thirteen chapters.

= Part П: Photonics, contains the remaining twelve chapters.

The material in the eBook versions is identical to that in the printed version except that
all 25 chapters reside in a single electronic file. The various eBooks enjoy the following
features:

= Hyperlinked table of contents at the beginning of the text.

xi

xii © PREFACE

= Hyperlinked table of contents as an optional sidebar.

= Hyperlinked index.

= Hyperlinked section titles, equations, and figures throughout.

= Animations for selected figures in the enhanced ePUB.

Presentation

Exercises, examples, reading lists, and appendices. Each chapter of the Third
Edition contains exercises, problem sets, and an extensive reading list. Examples are in-
cluded throughout to emphasize the concepts governing applications of current interest.
Appendices summarize the properties of one- and two-dimensional Fourier transforms,
linear systems, and modes of linear systems. Important equations are highlighted by
boxes and labels to facilitate retrieval.

Symbols, notation, units, and conventions. We make use of the symbols, no-
tation, units, and conventions commonly used in the photonics literature. Because of
the broad spectrum of topics covered, different fonts are often used to delineate the
multiple meanings of various symbols; a list of symbols, units, abbreviations, and
acronyms follows the appendices. We adhere to the International System of Units
(SI units). This modern form of the metric system is based on the meter, kilogram,
second, ampere, kelvin, candela, and mole, and is coupled with a collection of prefixes
(specified on the inside back cover of the text) that indicate multiplication or division
by various powers of ten. However, the reader is cautioned that photonics in the service
of different areas of science can make use of different conventions and symbols. In
Chapter 2, for example, we write the complex wavefunction for a monochromatic
plane wave in a form commonly used in electrical engineering, which differs from that
used in physics. Another example arises in Chapter 6, where the definitions we use for
right (left) circularly polarized light are in accord with general usage in optics, but are
opposite those generally used in engineering. These distinctions are often highlighted
by in situ footnotes. Though the choice of a particular convention is manifested in the
form assumed by various equations, it does not of course affect the results.

Color coding of illustrations. The color code used in illustrations is summarized
in the chart presented below. Light beams and optical-field distributions are displayed
in red (except when light beams of multiple wavelengths are involved, as is often the
case in nonlinear optics). When optical fields are represented, white indicates negative
values but when intensity is portrayed, white indicates zero. Acoustic beams and fields
are similarly represented, but by with green rather than red. Glass and glass fibers are
depicted in light blue; darker shades represent larger refractive indices. Semiconductors
are cast in green, with various shades representing different doping levels. Metal and
mirrors are indicated as copper. Semiconductor energy-band diagrams are portrayed in
blue and gray whereas photonic bandgaps are illustrated in pink.

Optical ray | | Г |

n
Semiconductor |
. Dielectric waveguide > V4
Optical wave
Metal a
oo) о as Photonic bandgap
Acoustic wave Fiber Митог
Color chart

PREFACE ХМ
Intended Audience
As with the previous editions, the Third Edition is meant to serve as:

= An introductory textbook for students of electrical engineering, applied physics,

physics, or optics at the senior or first-year graduate level.

= A self-contained work for self-study.

= A textbook suitable for use in programs of continuing professional development

offered by industry, universities, and professional societies.
The reader is assumed to have a background in engineering, physics, or optics, includ-
ing courses in modern physics, electricity and magnetism, and wave motion. Some
knowledge of linear systems and elementary quantum mechanics is helpful but not es-
sential. The intent is to provide an introduction to optics and photonics that emphasizes
the concepts that govern applications of current interest. The book should therefore
not be considered as a compendium encompassing all photonic devices and systems.
Indeed, some areas of photonics are not included at all, and many of the individual
chapters could easily have been expanded into free-standing monographs.
Organization
The Third Edition comprises 25 chapters compartmentalized into six divisions, as
depicted in the diagram below.
Optics Wave Propagation Lasers Photonic Devices

1. Ray Optics 7. Photonic Crystals 14. Light and Matter 20. Acousto-Optics

2. Wave Optics 8. Metals & Metamaterials || 15. Laser Amplifiers 21. Electro-Optics

3. Beam Optics 9. Guided-Wave Optics 16. Lasers 22. Nonlinear Optics

4. Fourier Optics 10. Fiber Optics 17. Semiconductor Optics | 23. Ultrafast Optics

5. Electromagnetic Optics | 11. Resonator Optics 18. LEDs & Laser Diodes 24. Interconnects/Switches

6. Polarization Optics 12. Statistical Optics 19. Photodetectors 25. Fiber Communications

13. Photon Optics
Optoelectronics Communications

In recognition of the different levels of mathematical sophistication of the intended
audience, we have endeavored to present difficult concepts in two steps: at an introduc-
tory level that provides physical insight and motivation, followed by a more advanced
analysis. This approach is exemplified by the treatment in Chapter 21 (Electro-Optics),
in which the subject is first presented using scalar notation and then treated again using
tensor notation. Sections dealing with material of a more advanced nature are indicated
by asterisks and may be omitted if desired. Summaries are provided at points where
recapitulation is deemed useful because of the involved nature of the material.

The form of the book is modular so that it can be used by readers with differ-
ent needs; this also provides instructors an opportunity to select topics for different
courses. Essential material from one chapter is often briefly summarized in another
to make each chapter as self-contained as possible. At the beginning of Chapter 25
(Optical Fiber Communications), for example, relevant material from earlier chapters
describing optical fibers, light sources, optical amplifiers, photodetectors, and photonic
integrated circuits is briefly reviewed. This places important information about the
components of such systems at the disposal of the reader in advance of presenting
system-design and performance considerations.

Contents
A principal feature of the Third Edition is a new chapter entitled Metal and Meta-
material Optics, an area that has had a substantial and increasing impact on photonics.

xiv. PREFACE
The new chapter comprises theory and applications for single- and double-negative
media, metal optics, plasmonics, metamaterial optics, and transformation optics.
All chapters have been thoroughly vetted and updated. A chapter-by-chapter com-
pilation of new material in the Third Edition is provided below.
= Chapter I (Ray Optics). Ray-optics descriptions for optical components such as
biprisms, axicons, LED light collimators, and Fresnel lenses have been added.
The connection between characterizing an arbitrary paraxial optical system by its
ray-transfer matrix and its cardinal points has been established. A matrix-optics
analysis for imaging with an arbitrary paraxial optical system has been included.
= Chapter 2 (Wave Optics). А wave-optics analysis of transmission through
biprisms and axicons has been added. A treatment of the Fresnel zone plate
from the perspective of interference has been introduced. An analysis of the
Michelson—Fabry—Perot (LIGO) interferometer used for the detection of gravita-
tional waves in the distant universe has been incorporated.
= Chapter 3 (Beam Optics). An enhanced description of Laguerre—Gaussian beams
has been provided. The basic features of several additional optical beams have
been introduced: optical vortex, Ince—Gaussian, nondiffracting Bessel, Bessel—
Gaussian, and Airy.
= Chapter 4 (Fourier Optics). An analysis of Fresnel diffraction from a periodic
aperture (Talbot effect) has been included. Nondiffracting waves and Bessel
beams have been introduced from a Fourier-optics perspective. A discussion of
computer-generated holography has been added.
= Chapter 5 (Electromagnetic Optics). A new section on the dipole wave, the
basis of near-field optics, has been incorporated. A new section on scattering that
includes Rayleigh and Mie scattering, along with attenuation in a medium with
scatterers, has been added.
= Chapter 6 (Polarization Optics). The material dealing with the dispersion relation
in anisotropic media has been reworked to simplify the presentation.
= Chapter 7 (Photonic-Crystal Optics). The behavior of the dielectric-slab beam-
splitter has been elucidated. A discussion relating to fabrication methods for 3D
photonic crystals has been incorporated.
= Chapter 8 (Metal and Metamaterial Optics). This new chapter, entitled Metal and
Metamaterial Optics, provides a venue for the examination of single- and double-
negative media, metal optics, plasmonics, metamaterial optics, and transformation
optics. Topics considered include evanescent waves, surface plasmon polaritons,
localized surface plasmons, nanoantennas, metasurfaces, subwavelength imaging,
and optical cloaking.
= Chapter 9 (Guided-Wave Optics). A new section on waveguide arrays that details
the mutual coupling of multiple waveguides and introduces the notion of super-
modes has been inserted. A new section on plasmonic waveguides that includes
metal—insulator—-metal and metal-slab waveguides, along with periodic metal—
dielectric arrays, has been incorporated.
= Chapter 10 (Fiber Optics). A discussion of multicore fibers, fiber couplers,
and photonic lanterns has been added. A brief discussion of the applications
of photonic-crystal fibers has been provided. A new section on multimaterial
fibers, including conventional and hybrid mid-infrared fibers, specialty fibers,
multimaterial fibers, and multifunctional fibers, has been introduced.
= Chapter 11 (Resonator Optics). A section on plasmonic resonators has been
added.
= Chapter 12 (Statistical Optics). The sections on optical coherence tomography
and unpolarized light have been reorganized.
= Chapter 13 (Photon Optics). A brief description of single-photon imaging has
been added. The discussion of quadrature-squeezed and photon-number-squeezed

PREFACE XV
light has been enhanced and examples of the generation and applications of these
forms of light have been provided. A section that describes two-photon light, en-
tangled photons, two-photon optics, and the generation and applications thereof,
has been incorporated. Examples of two-photon polarization, two-photon spatial
optics, and two-beam optics have been appended.

= Chapter 14 (Light and Matter). The title of this chapter was changed from Pho-
tons and Atoms to Light and Matter. Brief descriptions of the Zeeman effect, Stark
effect, and ionization energies have been added. The discussion of lanthanide-ion
manifolds has been enhanced. Descriptions of Doppler cooling, optical molasses,
optical tweezers, optical lattices, atom interferometry, and atom amplifiers have
been incorporated into the section on laser cooling, laser trapping, and atom
optics.

= Chapter 15 (Laser Amplifiers). Descriptions of quasi-three-level and in-band
pumping have been added. The sections on representative laser amplifiers, includ-
ing ruby, neodymium-doped glass, erbium-doped silica fiber, and Raman fiber
devices, have been enhanced.

= Chapter 16 (Lasers). Descriptions of tandem pumping, transition-ion-doped zinc-
chalcogenide lasers, silicon Raman lasers, and master-oscillator power-amplifiers
(MOPAs) have been added. Descriptions of inner-shell photopumping and X-ray
free-electron lasers have been incorporated. A new section on optical frequency
combs has been provided.

= Chapter 17 (Semiconductor Optics). The section on organic semiconductors has
been enhanced. A discussion of group-IV photonics, including graphene and 2D
materials such as transition-metal dichalcogenides, has been added. A brief dis-
cussion of quantum-dot single-photon emitters has been incorporated.

= Chapter 18 (LEDs and Laser Diodes). The title of this chapter was changed
from Semiconductor Photon Sources to LEDs and Laser Diodes. A new section
on the essentials of LED lighting has been incorporated. Brief discussions of
the following topics are now included: resonant-cavity LEDs, silicon-photonics
light sources, quantum-dot semiconductor amplifiers, external-cavity wavelength-
tunable laser diodes, broad-area laser diodes, and laser-diode bars and stacks.
A discussion of the semiconductor-laser linewidth-enhancement factor has been
added. A new section on nanolasers has been introduced.

= Chapter 19 (Photodetectors). The title of this chapter was changed from Semi-
conductor Photon Detectors to Photodetectors. Brief discussions of the following
topics have been added: organic, plasmonic, group-IV-based, and graphene-
enhanced photodetectors; edge vs. normal illumination; photon-trapping mi-
crostructures; SACM and superlattice APDs; multiplied dark current; and 1 / f
detector noise. New examples include multi-junction photovoltaic solar cells;
Ge-on-Si photodiodes; graphene-Si Schottky-barrier photodiodes; and SAM,
SACM, and staircase APDs. A new section on single-photon and photon-number-
resolving detectors details the operation of SPADs, SiPMs, and TESs.

= Chapter 20 (Acousto-Optics). The identical forms of the photoelastic matrix in
acousto-optics and the Kerr-effect matrix in electro-optics has been highlighted
for cubic isotropic media.

= Chapter 21 (Electro-Optics). New sections on passive- and active-matrix liquid-
crystal displays have been introduced and their operation has been elucidated.
The performance of active-matrix liquid-crystal displays (AMLCDs) has been
compared with that of active-matrix organic light-emitting displays (AMOLEDs).

= Chapter 22 (Nonlinear Optics). New material relating to guided-wave nonlinear
optics has been introduced. Quasi-phase matching in periodically poled integrated
optical waveguides, and the associated improvement in wave-mixing efficiency,
is now considered. The section pertaining to Raman gain has been enhanced.

= Chapter 23 (Ultrafast Optics). New examples have been incorporated that con-

Xvi PREFACE
sider chirped pulse amplification in a petawatt laser and the generation of high-
energy solitons in a photonic-crystal rod. A new section on high-harmonic gen-
eration and attosecond optics has been added. The section on pulse detection has
been reorganized.
= Chapter 24 (Optical Interconnects and Switches). The role of optical intercon-
nects at the inter-board, inter-chip, and intrachip scale of computer systems is
delineated. All-optical switching now incorporates nonparametric and parametric
photonic switches that operate on the basis of manifold nonlinear-optical effects.
Photonic-crystal and plasmonic photonic switches are discussed. The treatment of
photonic logic gates now includes an analysis of embedded bistable systems and
examples of bistability in fiber-based-interferometric and microring laser systems.
= Chapter 25 (Optical Fiber Communications). The material on fiber-optic compo-
nents has been updated and rewritten, and the role of photonic integrated circuits
is delineated. A new section on space-division multiplexing in multicore and
multimode fibers has been added. The section on coherent detection has been
expanded and now emphasizes digital coherent receivers with spectrally efficient
coding.
Representative Courses
The different chapters of the book may be combined in various ways for use in courses
of semester or quarter duration. Representative examples of such courses are presented
below. Some of these courses may be offered as part of a sequence. Other selections
may be made to suit the particular objectives of instructors and students.
Optics
8. Metals & Metamaterials 14. Light and Matter 20. Acousto-Optics
9. Guided-Wave Optics 15. Laser Amplifiers 21. Electro-Optics
10. Fiber Optics 16. Lasers 22. Nonlinear Optics
11. Resonator Optics 17. Semiconductor Optics 23. Ultrafast Optics
18. LEDs & Laser Diodes 24. Interconnects/Switches
19. Photodetectors 25. Fiber Communications
7. Photonic Crystals
The first six chapters of the book are suitable for an introductory course on Optics. These may
be supplemented by Chapter 12 (Statistical Optics) to introduce incoherent and partially coherent
light, and by Chapter 13 (Photon Optics) to introduce the photon. The introductory sections of
Chapters 9 and 10 (Guided-Wave Optics and Fiber Optics, respectively) may be added to cover some
applications.
Guided-Wave Optics
1. Ray Optics 14. Light and Matter 20. Acousto-Optics
2. Wave Optics 15. Laser Amplifiers 21. Electro-Optics
3. Beam Optics 16. Lasers 22. Nonlinear Optics
4. Fourier Optics 17. Semiconductor Optics 23. Ultrafast Optics
5. Electromagnetic Optics 12. Statistical Optics 18. LEDs & Laser Diodes 24. Interconnects/Switches
6. Polarization Optics 13. Photon Optics 19. Photodetectors 25. Fiber Communications
7-Photonic Crystals
A course on Guided-Wave Optics might begin with an introduction to wave propagation in layered
and periodic media in Chapter 7 (Photonic-Crystal Optics), and could include Chapter 8 (Metal and
Metamaterial Optics). This would be followed by Chapters 9, 10, and 11 (Guided-Wave Optics,
Fiber Optics, and Resonator Optics, respectively). The introductory sections of Chapters 21 and 24
(Electro-Optics and Optical Interconnects and Switches) would provide additional material.

PREFACE  XVii
Lasers
1. Ray Optics 8. Metals & Metamaterials 20. Acousto-Optics
2. Wave Optics 9. Guided-Wave Optics 21. Electro-Optics
_3. Веат Optics о 10. Fiber Optics 22. Nonlinear Optics
5. Electromagnetic Optics 12. Statistical Optics 24. Interconnects/Switches
6. Polarization Optics 13. Photon Optics 19. Photodetectors 25. Fiber Communications
7. Photonic Crystals
A course on Lasers could begin with Beam Optics and Resonator Optics (Chapters 3 and 11, respec-
tively), followed by Light and Matter (Chapter 14). The initial portion of Photon Optics (Chapter 13)
could be assigned. The heart of the course would be the material contained in Laser Amplifiers and
Lasers (Chapters 15 and 16, respectively). The course might also include material drawn from Semi-
conductor Optics and LEDs and Laser Diodes (Chapters 17 and 18, respectively). An introduction to
femtosecond lasers could be extracted from some sections of Ultrafast Optics (Chapter 23).
Optoelectronics
1. Ray Optics 8. Metals & Metamaterials 14. Light and Matter 20. Acousto-Optics
2. Wave Optics 9. Guided-Wave Optics 15. Laser Amplifiers 21. Electro-Optics
3. Beam Optics 10. Fiber Optics 16. Lasers 22. Nonlinear Optics
4. Fourier Optics 11. Resonator Optics 23. Ultrafast Optics
5. Electromagnetic Optics 12. Statistical Optics 24. Interconnects/Switches
6. Polarization Optics 13. Photon Optics 25. Fiber Communications
7. Photonic Crystals
The chapters on Semiconductor Optics, LEDs and Laser Diodes, and Photodetectors (Chapters 17,
18, and 19, respectively) form a suitable basis for a course on Optoelectronics. This material would be
supplemented with optics background from earlier chapters and could include topics such as liquid-
crystal devices (Secs. 6.5 and 21.3), electroabsorption modulators (Sec. 21.5), and an introduction to
photonic devices used for switching and/or communications (Chapters 24 and 25, respectively).
Photonic Devices
1. Ray Optics 8. Metals & Metamaterials 14. Light and Matter
2. Wave Optics 9. Guided-Wave Optics 15. Laser Amplifiers
3. Beam Optics 10. Fiber Optics 16. Lasers
4. Fourier Optics 11. Resonator Optics 17. Semiconductor Optics 23. Ultrafast Optics
5. Electromagnetic Optics 12. Statistical Optics 18. LEDs & Laser Diodes ‚24. Interconnects/Switches |
6. Polarization Optics 13. Photon Optics 19. Photodetectors 25. Fiber Communications
7. Photonic Crystals
Photonic Devices is a course that would consider the devices used in Acousto-Optics, Electro-Optics,
and Nonlinear Optics (Chapters 20, 21, and 22, respectively). It might also include devices used in
optical routing and switching, as discussed in Optical Interconnects and Switches (Chapter 24).
Nonlinear & Ultrafast Optics
1. Ray Optics 8. Metals & Metamaterials 14. Light and Matter 20. Acousto-Optics
2. Wave Optics 9. Guided-Wave Optics 15. Laser Amplifiers
3. Beam Optics 10. Fiber Optics 16. Lasers
4. Fourier Optics 11. Resonator Optics 17. Semiconductor Optics
5. Electromagnetic Optics 12. Statistical Optics 18. LEDs & Laser Diodes 24. Interconnects/Switches
6. Polarization Optics 13. Photon Optics 19. Photodetectors 25. Fiber Communications
7. Photonic Crystals
The material contained in Chapters 21-23 (Electro-Optics, Nonlinear Optics, and Ultrafast Optics,
respectively) is suitable for an in-depth course on Nonlinear and Ultrafast Optics. These chapters

ХУЙ — PREFACE
could be supplemented by the material pertaining to electro-optic and all-optical switching in Chap-
ter 24 (Optical Interconnects and Switches).
Fiber-Optic Communications

1. Ray Optics 8. Metals & Metamaterials — 14. Light and Matter 20. Acousto-Optics

2. Wave Optics 15. Laser Amplifiers 21. Electro-Optics

3. Beam Optics 16. Lasers 22. Nonlinear Optics

4. Fourier Optics 11. Resonator Optics 17. Semiconductor Optics 23. Ultrafast Optics

5. Electromagnetic Optics 12. Statistical Optics 18. LEDs & Laser Diodes

6. Polarization Optics 13. Photon Optics 19. Photodetectors a
7. Photonic Crystals
The heart of a course on Fiber-Optic Communications would be the material contained in Chap-
ter 25 (Optical Fiber Communications). Background for this course would comprise material drawn
from Chapters 9, 10, 18, and 19 (Guided-Wave Optics, Fiber Optics, LEDs and Laser Diodes, and
Photodetectors, respectively), along with material contained in Secs. 15.3C and 15.3D (doped-fiber
and Raman fiber amplifiers, respectively). If fiber-optic networks were to be emphasized, Sec. 24.3
(photonic switches) would be a valuable adjunct.

Optical Information Processing

1. Ray Optics 8. Metals & Metamaterials 14. Light and Matter 20. Acousto-Optics
2. Wave Optics 9. Guided-Wave Optics 15. Laser Amplifiers 21. Electro-Optics

3. Beam Optics 10. Fiber Optics 16. Lasers 22. Nonlinear Optics

4. Fourier Optics = 11. Resonator Optics 17. Semiconductor Optics 23. Ultrafast Optics

5. Electromagnetic Optics 12. Statistical Optics = 18. LEDs & Laser Diodes ‚24. Interconnects/Switches —
6. Polarization Optics 13. Photon Optics 19. Photodetectors 25. Fiber Communications

7. Photonic Crystals
Background material for a course on Optical Information Processing would be drawn from Wave
Optics and Beam Optics (Chapters 2 and 3, respectively). The course could cover coherent image for-
mation and processing from Fourier Optics (Chapter 4) along with incoherent and partially coherent
imaging from Statistical Optics (Chapter 12). The focus could then shift to devices used for analog
data processing, such as those considered in Acousto-Optics (Chapter 20). The course could then
finish with material on switches and gates used for digital data processing, such as those considered
in Optical Interconnects and Switches (Chapter 24).

Acknowledgments
We are indebted to many colleagues for providing us with valuable suggestions re-
garding improvements for the Third Edition: Rodrigo Amezcua-Correa, Luca Argenti,
Joe C. Campbell, Zenghu Chang, Demetrios Christodoulides, Peter J. Delfyett, Dirk
Englund, Eric R. Fossum, Majeed M. Hayat, Pieter G. Kik, Akhlesh Lakhtakia,
Guifang Li, Steven В. Lowen, М. G. “Ли?” Moharam, Riidiger Paschotta, Kosmas L.
Tsakmakidis, Shin-Tson Wu, Timothy M. Yarnall, and Boris Y. Zeldovich. We are
also grateful to many of our former students and postdoctoral associates who posed
excellent questions that helped us hone our presentation in the Third Edition, including
John David Giese, Barry D. Jacobson, Samik Mukherjee, Adam Palmer, and Jian Yin.

We extend our special thanks to Mark Feuer, Joseph W. Goodman, and Mohammed F.
Saleh who graciously provided us with in-depth critiques of various chapters.

Amy Hendrickson provided invaluable assistance with the Latex style files and
eBook formatting. We are grateful to our Editors at John Wiley & Sons, Inc., who
offered valuable suggestions and support throughout the course of production: Brett
Kurzmann, Sarah Keegan, Nick Prindle, and Melissa Yanuzzi.

PREFACE _ xix
Finally, we are most appreciative of the generous support provided by CREOL,
the College of Optics & Photonics at the University of Central Florida, the Boston
University Photonics Center, and the Boston University College of Engineering.
Photo Credits
Many of the images on the chapter opening pages were carried forward from the First
and Second Editions. Additional credits for the chapter opening pages of the Third
Edition include: Wikimedia Commons (Laguerre and Bessel in Chapter 3, Stokes in
Chapter 6, Drude in Chapter 8, Tyndall in Chapter 9, and Born in Chapter 12); La
Science Illustrée, Volume 4 of the French weekly published in the second period of
1889 (Colladon in Chapter 9); Courtesy of Corning Incorporated (Schultz, Keck, &
Maurer in Chapter 10); Courtesy of the Faculty History Project at Bentley Histori-
cal Library, University of Michigan (Franken in Chapter 22); and Courtesy of Peg
Skorpinski, photographer, and the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley (Kaminow in Chapter 25). Self-
photographs were provided by Viktor Georgievich Veselago (Veselago in Chapter 8);
Sir John Pendry (Pendry in Chapter 8); Paul B. Corkum (Corkum in Chapter 23);
Gérard Mourou (Mourou in Chapter 23); and the authors.
ВАНАА Е. A. SALEH
Orlando, Florida
MALVIN Cart TEICH
Boston, Massachusetts
June 4, 2018

ees
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

Since the publication of the First Edition in 1991, Fundamentals of Photonics has
been reprinted some 20 times, translated into Czech and Japanese, and used worldwide
as a textbook and reference. During this period, major developments in photonics
have continued apace, and have enabled technologies such as telecommunications
and applications in industry and medicine. The Second Edition reports some of these
developments, while maintaining the size of this single-volume tome within practical
limits.

In its new organization, Fundamentals of Photonics continues to serve as a self-
contained and up-to-date introductory-level textbook, featuring a logical blend of
theory and applications. Many readers of the First Edition have been pleased with its
abundant and well-illustrated figures. This feature has been enhanced in the Second
Edition by the introduction of full color throughout the book, offering improved clarity
and readability.

While each of the 22 chapters of the First Edition has been thoroughly updated, the
principal feature of the Second Edition is the addition of two new chapters: one on
photonic-crystal optics and another on ultrafast optics. These deal with developments
that have had a substantial and growing impact on photonics over the past decade.

The new chapter on photonic-crystal optics provides a foundation for understand-
ing the optics of layered media, including Bragg gratings, with the help of a matrix
approach. Propagation of light in one-dimensional periodic media is examined using
Bloch modes with matrix and Fourier methods. The concept of the photonic bandgap
is introduced. Light propagation in two- and three-dimensional photonic crystals, and
the associated dispersion relations and bandgap structures, are developed. Sections on
photonic-crystal waveguides, holey fibers, and photonic-crystal resonators have also
been added at appropriate locations in other chapters.

The new chapter on ultrafast optics contains sections on picosecond and femto-
second optical pulses and their characterization, shaping, and compression, as well as
their propagation in optical fibers, in the domain of linear optics. Sections on ultrafast
nonlinear optics include pulsed parametric interactions and optical solitons. Methods
for the detection of ultrafast optical pulses using available detectors, which are rela-
tively slow, are reviewed.

In addition to these two new chapters, the chapter on optical interconnects and
switches has been completely rewritten and supplemented with topics such as wave-
length and time routing and switching, FBGs, WGRs, SOAs, TOADs, and packet
switches. The chapter on optical fiber communications has also been significantly
updated and supplemented with material on WDM networks; it now offers concise
descriptions of topics such as dispersion compensation and management, optical am-
plifiers, and soliton optical communications.

Continuing advances in device-fabrication technology have stimulated the emer-
gence of nanophotonics, which deals with optical processes that take place over
subwavelength (nanometer) spatial scales. Nanophotonic devices and systems include
quantum-confined structures, such as quantum dots, nanoparticles, and nanoscale
periodic structures used to synthesize metamaterials with exotic optical properties
such as negative refractive index. They also include configurations in which light (or
its interaction with matter) is confined to nanometer-size (rather than micrometer-
size) regions near boundaries, as in surface plasmon optics. Evanescent fields, such
as those produced at a surface where total internal reflection occurs, also exhibit such
XX

PREFACE ХХ!
confinement. Evanescent fields are present in the immediate vicinity of subwavelength-
size apertures, such as the open tip of a tapered optical fiber. Their use allows imaging
with resolution beyond the diffraction limit and forms the basis of near-field optics.
Many of these emerging areas are described at suitable locations in the Second Edition.

New sections have been added in the process of updating the various chapters. New
topics introduced in the early chapters include: Laguerre—-Gaussian beams; near-field
imaging; the Sellmeier equation; fast and slow light; optics of conductive media and
plasmonics; doubly negative metamaterials; the Poincaré sphere and Stokes parame-
ters; polarization mode dispersion; whispering-gallery modes; microresonators; optical
coherence tomography; and photon orbital angular momentum.

In the chapters on laser optics, new topics include: rare-earth and Raman fiber
amplifiers and lasers; EUV, X-ray, and free-electron lasers; and chemical and random
lasers. In the area of optoelectronics, new topics include: gallium nitride-based struc-
tures and devices; superluminescent diodes; organic and white-light LEDs; quantum-
confined lasers; quantum cascade lasers; microcavity lasers; photonic-crystal lasers;
array detectors; low-noise APDs; SPADs; and QWIPs.

The chapter on nonlinear optics has been supplemented with material on parametric-
interaction tuning curves; quasi-phase-matching devices; two-wave mixing and cross-
phase modulation; THz generation; and other nonlinear optical phenomena associated
with narrow optical pulses, including chirp pulse amplification and supercontinuum
light generation. The chapter on electro-optics now includes a discussion of electroab-
sorption modulators.

Appendix C on modes of linear systems has been expanded and now offers an
overview of the concept of modes as they appear in numerous locations within the
book. Finally, additional exercises and problems have been provided, and these are
now numbered disjointly to avoid confusion.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to many colleagues for providing us with valuable comments about
draft chapters for the Second Edition and for drawing our attention to errors in the
First Edition: Mete Atatiire, Michael Bar, Robert Balahura, Silvia Carrasco, Stephen
Chinn, Thomas Daly, Gianni Di Giuseppe, Adel El-Nadi, John Fourkas, Majeed
Hayat, Tony Heinz, Erich Ippen, Martin Jaspan, Gerd Keiser, Jonathan Kane, Paul
Kelley, Ted Moustakas, Allen Mullins, Magued Nasr, Roy Olivier, Roberto Paiella,
Peter W. E. Smith, Stephen P. Smith, Kenneth Suslick, Anna Swan, Tristan Tayag,
Tommaso Toffoli, and Brad Tousley.

We extend our special thanks to those colleagues who graciously provided us with
in-depth critiques of various chapters: Ayman Abouraddy, Luca Dal Negro, and Paul
Prucnal.

We are indebted to the legions of students and postdoctoral associates who have
posed so many excellent questions that helped us hone our presentation. In particular,
many improvements were initiated by suggestions from Mark Booth, Jasper Cabalu,
Michael Cunha, Darryl Goode, Chris LaFratta, Rui Li, Eric Lynch, Nan Ma, Nishant
Mohan, Julie Praino, Yunjie Tong, and Ranjith Zachariah. We are especially grateful to
Mohammed Saleh, who diligently read much of the manuscript and provided us with
excellent suggestions for improvement throughout.

Wai Yan (Eliza) Wong provided logistical support and a great deal of assistance in
crafting diagrams and figures. Many at Wiley, including George Telecki, our Editor,
and Rachel Witmer have been most helpful, patient, and encouraging. We appreciate
the attentiveness and thoroughness that Melissa Yanuzzi brought to the production pro-
cess. Don DeLand of the Integre Technical Publishing Company provided invaluable
assistance in setting up the Latex style files.

xxii. = PREFACE

We are most appreciative of the financial support provided by the National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF), in particular the Center for Subsurface Sensing and Imaging
Systems (CenSSIS), an NSF-supported Engineering Research Center; the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA); the National Reconnaissance Office
(NRO); the U.S. Army Research Office (ARO); the David & Lucile Packard Founda-
tion; the Boston University College of Engineering; and the Boston University Photon-
ics Center.

Photo Credits. Most of the portraits were carried forward from the First Edi-
tion with the benefit of permissions provided for all editions. Additional credits are:
Godfrey Kneller 1689 portrait (Newton); Siegfried Bendixen 1828 lithograph (Gauss);
Engraving in the Small Portraits Collection, History of Science Collections, University
of Oklahoma Libraries (Fraunhofer); Stanford University, Courtesy AIP Emilio Segré
Visual Archives (Bloch); Eli Yablonovitch (Yablonovitch); Sajeev John (John); Charles
Kuen Kao (Kao); Philip St John Russell (Russell); Ecole Polytechnique (Fabry); Ob-
servatoire des Sciences de |’ Univers (Perot); AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives (Born);
Lagrelius & Westphal 1920 portrait (Bohr); AIP Emilio Segré Visual Archives, Weber
Collection (W. L. Bragg); Linn F. Mollenauer (Mollenauer); Roger H. Stolen (Stolen);
and James P. Gordon (Gordon). In Chapter 24, the Bell Symbol was reproduced with
the permission of BellSouth Intellectual Property Marketing Corporation, the AT&T
logo is displayed with the permission of AT&T, and Lucent Technologies permitted
us use of their logo. Stephen G. Eick kindly provided the image used at the beginning
of Chapter 25. The photographs of Saleh and Teich were provided courtesy of Boston
University.

ВАНАА Е. A. SALEH
MALvIN Cart TEICH
Boston, Massachusetts
December 19, 2006

ees
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

Optics is an old and venerable subject involving the generation, propagation, and de-
tection of light. Three major developments, which have been achieved in the last thirty
years, are responsible for the rejuvenation of optics and for its increasing importance
in modern technology: the invention of the laser, the fabrication of low-loss optical
fibers, and the introduction of semiconductor optical devices. As a result of these de-
velopments, new disciplines have emerged and new terms describing these disciplines
have come into use: electro-optics, optoelectronics, quantum electronics, quantum
optics, and lightwave technology. Although there is a lack of complete agreement
about the precise usages of these terms, there is a general consensus regarding their
meanings.

Photonics

Electro-optics is generally reserved for optical devices in which electrical effects play a
role (lasers, and electro-optic modulators and switches, for example). Optoelectronics,
on the other hand, typically refers to devices and systems that are essentially electronic
in nature but involve light (examples are light-emitting diodes, liquid-crystal display
devices, and array photodetectors). The term guantum electronics is used in connection
with devices and systems that rely principally on the interaction of light with matter
(lasers and nonlinear optical devices used for optical amplification and wave mixing
serve as examples). Studies of the quantum and coherence properties of light lie within
the realm of guantum optics. The term lightwave technology has been used to describe
devices and systems that are used in optical communications and optical signal pro-
cessing.

In recent years, the term photonics has come into use. This term, which was coined
in analogy with electronics, reflects the growing tie between optics and electronics
forged by the increasing role that semiconductor materials and devices play in optical
systems. Electronics involves the control of electric-charge flow (in vacuum or in
matter); photonics involves the control of photons (in free space or in matter). The
two disciplines clearly overlap since electrons often control the flow of photons and,
conversely, photons control the flow of electrons. The term photonics also reflects the
importance of the photon nature of light in describing the operation of many optical
devices.

Scope

This book provides an introduction to the fundamentals of photonics. The term pho-
tonics is used broadly to encompass all of the aforementioned areas, including the
following:

= The generation of coherent light by lasers, and incoherent light by luminescence

sources such as light-emitting diodes.

= The transmission of light in free space, through conventional optical components

such as lenses, apertures, and imaging systems, and through waveguides such as
optical fibers.

= The modulation, switching, and scanning of light by the use of electrically, acous-

tically, or optically controlled devices.

= The amplification and frequency conversion of light by the use of wave interac-

tions in nonlinear materials.

= The detection of light.

xxiii

XxiV PREFACE

These areas have found ever-increasing applications in optical communications, signal
processing, computing, sensing, display, printing, and energy transport.

Approach and Presentation

The underpinnings of photonics are provided in a number of chapters that offer concise
introductions to:

= The four theories of light (each successively more advanced than the preceding):

ray optics, wave optics, electromagnetic optics, and photon optics.

= The theory of interaction of light with matter.

= The theory of semiconductor materials and their optical properties.

These chapters serve as basic building blocks that are used in other chapters to describe
the generation of light (by lasers and light-emitting diodes); the transmission of light
(by optical beams, diffraction, imaging, optical waveguides, and optical fibers); the
modulation and switching of light (by the use of electro-optic, acousto-optic, and
nonlinear-optic devices); and the detection of light (by means of photodetectors). Many
applications and examples of real systems are provided so that the book is a blend
theory and practice. The final chapter is devoted to the study of fiber-optic communica-
tions, which provides an especially rich example in which the generation, transmission,
modulation, and detection of light are all part of a single photonic system used for the
transmission of information.

The theories of light are presented at progressively increasing levels of difficulty.
Thus light is described first as rays, then scalar waves, then electromagnetic waves,
and finally, photons. Each of these descriptions has its domain of applicability. Our
approach is to draw from the simplest theory that adequately describes the phenomenon
or intended application. Ray optics is therefore used to describe imaging systems and
the confinement of light in waveguides and optical resonators. Scalar wave theory
provides a description of optical beams, which are essential for the understanding of
lasers, and of Fourier optics, which is useful for describing coherent optical systems
and holography. Electromagnetic theory provides the basis for the polarization and
dispersion of light, and the optics of guided waves, fibers, and resonators. Photon optics
serves to describe the interactions of light with matter, explaining such processes as
light generation and detection, and light mixing in nonlinear media.

Intended Audience
Fundamentals of Photonics is meant to serve as:

= An introductory textbook for students in electrical engineering or applied physics

at the senior or first-year graduate level.

и A self-contained work for self-study.

= A text for programs of continuing professional development offered by industry,

universities, and professional societies.

The reader is assumed to have a background in engineering or applied physics,
including courses in modern physics, electricity and magnetism, and wave motion.
Some knowledge of linear systems and elementary quantum mechanics is helpful
but not essential. Our intent has been to provide an introduction to photonics that
emphasizes the concepts governing applications of current interest. The book should,
therefore, not be considered as a compendium that encompasses all photonic devices
and systems. Indeed, some areas of photonics are not included at all, and many of the
individual chapters could easily have been expanded into separate monographs.

PREFACE = XXV
Problems, Reading Lists, and Appendices
A set of problems is provided at the end of each chapter. Problems are numbered
in accordance with the chapter sections to which they apply. Quite often, problems
deal with ideas or applications not mentioned in the text, analytical derivations, and
numerical computations designed to illustrate the magnitudes of important quantities.
Problems marked with asterisks are of a more advanced nature. A number of exer-
cises also appear within the text of each chapter to help the reader develop a better
understanding of (or to introduce an extension of) the material.

Appendices summarize the properties of one- and two-dimensional Fourier trans-
forms, linear-systems theory, and modes of linear systems (which are important in
polarization devices, optical waveguides, and resonators); these are called upon at
appropriate points throughout the book. Each chapter ends with a reading list that
includes a selection of important books, review articles, and a few classic papers of
special significance.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to many colleagues for reading portions of the text and providing
helpful comments: Govind P. Agrawal, David H. Auston, Rasheed Azzam, Nikolai
G. Basov, Franco Cerrina, Emmanuel Desurvire, Paul Diament, Eric Fossum, Robert
J. Keyes, Robert H. Kingston, Rodney Loudon, Leonard Mandel, Leon McCaughan,
Richard М. Osgood, Jan Pefina, Robert H. Rediker, Arthur L. Schawlow, 5. В. Se-
shadri, Henry Stark, Ferrel G. Stremler, John A. Tataronis, Charles H. Townes, Patrick
R. Trischitta, Wen I. Wang, and Edward S. Yang.

We are especially indebted to John Whinnery and Emil Wolf for providing us with
many suggestions that greatly improved the presentation.

Several colleagues used portions of the notes in their classes and provided us with
invaluable feedback. These include Etan Bourkoff at Johns Hopkins University (now
at the University of South Carolina), Mark O. Freeman at the University of Colorado,
George С. Papen at the University of Illinois, and Paul К. Prucnal at Princeton Univer-
sity.

Many of our students and former students contributed to this material in various
ways over the years and we owe them a great debt of thanks: Gaetano L. Aiello,
Mohamad Asi, Richard Campos, Buddy Christyono, Andrew H. Cordes, Andrew
David, Ernesto Fontenla, Evan Goldstein, Matthew E. Hansen, Dean U. Hekel, Conor
Heneghan, Adam Heyman, Bradley M. Jost, David A. Landgraf, Kanghua Lu, Ben
Nathanson, Winslow Г. Sargeant, Michael T. Schmidt, Raul Е. Sequeira, David Small,
Kraisin Songwatana, Nikola S. Subotic, Jeffrey A. Tobin, and Emily M. True. Our
thanks also go to the legions of unnamed students who, through a combination of
vigilance and the desire to understand the material, found countless errors.

We particularly appreciate the many contributions and help of those students who
were intimately involved with the preparation of this book at its various stages of
completion: Niraj Agrawal, Suzanne Keilson, Todd Larchuk, Guifang Li, and Philip
Tham.

We are grateful for the assistance given to us by a number of colleagues in
the course of collecting the photographs used at the beginnings of the chapters:
E. Scott Barr, Nicolaas Bloembergen, Martin Carey, Marjorie Graham, Margaret
Harrison, Ann Kottner, G. Thomas Holmes, John Howard, Theodore H. Maiman,
Edward Palik, Martin Parker, Aleksandr M. Prokhorov, Jarus Quinn, Lesley M.
Richmond, Claudia Schiiler, Patrick R. Trischitta, J. Michael Vaughan, and Emil
Wolf. Specific photo credits are as follows: AIP Meggers Gallery of Nobel Laureates
(Gabor, Townes, Basov, Prokhorov, W. L. Bragg); AIP Niels Bohr Library (Rayleigh,
Fraunhofer, Maxwell, Planck, Bohr, Einstein in Chapter 14, W. H. Bragg); Archives
de l’Académie des Sciences de Paris (Fabry); The Astrophysical Journal (Perot);

xXxvi PREFACE

AT&T Bell Laboratories (Shockley, Brattain, Bardeen); Bettmann Archives (Young,
Gauss, Tyndall); Bibliothéque Nationale de Paris (Fermat, Fourier, Poisson); Burndy
Library (Newton, Huygens); Deutsches Museum (Hertz); ETH Bibliothek (Einstein
in Chapter 13); Bruce Fritz (Saleh); Harvard University (Bloembergen); Heidelberg
University (Pockels); Kelvin Museum of the University of Glasgow (Kerr); Theodore
H. Maiman (Maiman); Princeton University (von Neumann); Smithsonian Institu-
tion (Fresnel); Stanford University (Schawlow); Emil Wolf (Born, Wolf). Corning
Incorporated kindly provided the photograph used at the beginning of Chapter 10.
We are grateful to GE for the use of their logotype, which is a registered trademark
of the General Electric Company, at the beginning of Chapter 18. The IBM logo at
the beginning of Chapter 18 is being used with special permission from IBM. The
right-most logotype at the beginning of Chapter 18 was supplied courtesy of Lincoln
Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. AT&T Bell Laboratories kindly
permitted us use of the diagram at the beginning of Chapter 25.

We greatly appreciate the continued support provided to us by the National Sci-
ence Foundation, the Center for Telecommunications Research, and the Joint Services
Electronics Program through the Columbia Radiation Laboratory.

Finally, we extend our sincere thanks to our editors, George Telecki and Bea Shube,
for their guidance and suggestions throughout the course of preparation of this book.

ВАНАА Е. A. SALEH
Madison, Wisconsin

MALvIN Cart TEICH
New York, New York
April 3, 1991

FUNDAMENTALSOF
PHOTONICS
Part |: Optics
(Chapters 1-13)
cD У.
ia
Ш.
а
7


CHAPTER
ee
1.1 POSTULATES OF RAY OPTICS 5
1.2 SIMPLE OPTICAL COMPONENTS 8

A. Mirrors

B. Planar Boundaries

C. Spherical Boundaries and Lenses

D. Light Guides
1.3 GRADED-INDEX OPTICS 20

A. The Ray Equation

В. Graded-Index Optical Components

*C. The Eikonal Equation
1.4 MATRIX OPTICS 27

А. The Ray-Transfer Matrix

B. Matrices of Simple Optical Components

C. Matrices of Cascaded Optical Components

D. Periodic Optical Systems

th}
ай . а =
Г \ A \
Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727) set forth a Pierre de Fermat (1601-1665) enunciated а
theory of optics in which light emissions con- rule, known as Fermat’s Principle, in which
sist of collections of corpuscles that propagate light rays travels along the path of least time
rectilinearly. relative to neighboring paths.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
3

CSC
Light can be described as an electromagnetic wave phenomenon governed by the
same theoretical principles that govern all other forms of electromagnetic radiation,
such as radio waves and X-rays. This conception of light is called electromagnetic
optics. Electromagnetic radiation propagates in the form of two mutually coupled
vector waves, an electric-field wave and a magnetic-field wave. Nevertheless, it is
possible to describe many optical phenomena using a simplified scalar wave theory
in which light is described by a single scalar wavefunction. This approximate way of
treating light is called scalar wave optics, or simply wave optics.

When light waves propagate through and around objects whose dimensions are
much greater than the wavelength of the light, the wave nature is not readily discerned
and the behavior of light can be adequately described by rays obeying a set of geomet-
rical rules. This model of light is called ray optics. From a mathematical perspective,
ray optics is the limit of wave optics when the wavelength is infinitesimally small.

Thus, electromagnetic optics encompasses wave optics, which in turn encompasses
ray optics, as illustrated in Fig. 1.0-1. Ray optics and wave optics are approximate
theories that derive validity from their successes in producing results that approximate
those based on the more rigorous electromagnetic theory.

Quantum Optics Figure 1.0-1 The theory of quantum optics
provides an explanation for virtually all optical

Electromagnetic phenomena. The electromagnetic theory of light
Optics (electromagnetic optics) provides the most com-
Wave Optics plete treatment of light within the confines of clas-
; sical optics. Wave optics is a scalar approximation

Ray Optics of electromagnetic optics. Ray optics is the limit
of wave optics when the wavelength is very short.

Although electromagnetic optics provides the most complete treatment of light
within the confines of classical optics, certain optical phenomena are characteristically
quantum mechanical in nature and cannot be explained classically. These nonclassical
phenomena are described by a quantum version of electromagnetic theory known as
quantum electrodynamics. For optical phenomena, this theory is also referred to as
quantum optics.

Historically, the theories of optics developed roughly in the following order: (1) ray
optics — (2) wave optics — (3) electromagnetic optics — (4) quantum optics. These
models are progressively more complex and sophisticated, and were developed suc-
cessively to provide explanations for the outcomes of increasingly subtle and precise
optical experiments. The optimal choice of a model is the simplest one that satisfacto-
rily describes a particular phenomenon, but it is sometimes difficult to know a priori
which model achieves this. Experience is often the best guide.

For pedagogical reasons, the initial chapters of this book follow the historical order
indicated above. Each model of light begins with a set of postulates (provided without
proof), from which a large body of results are generated. The postulates of each model
are shown to arise as special cases of the next-higher-level model. In this chapter we
begin with ray optics.

4

1.1 POSTULATES OF RAYOPTICS 5
This Chapter
Ray optics is the simplest theory of light. Light is described by rays that travel in
different optical media in accordance with a set of geometrical rules. Ray optics is
therefore also called geometrical optics. Ray optics is an approximate theory. Al-
though it adequately describes most of our daily experiences with light, there are many
phenomena that ray optics cannot adequately construe (as amply attested to by the
remaining chapters of this book).

Ray optics is concerned with the locations and directions of light rays. It is therefore
useful in studying image formation — the collection of rays from each point of an
object and their redirection by an optical component onto a corresponding point of an
image. Ray optics permits us to determine the conditions under which light is guided
within a given medium, such as a glass fiber. In isotropic media, optical rays point in
the direction of the flow of optical energy. Ray bundles can be constructed in which the
density of rays is proportional to the density of light energy. When light is generated
isotropically from a point source, for example, the energy associated with the rays in a
given cone is proportional to the solid angle of the cone. Rays may be traced through
an optical system to determine the optical energy crossing a given area.

This chapter begins with a set of postulates from which we derive the simple rules
that govern the propagation of light rays through optical media. In Sec. 1.2 these
rules are applied to simple optical components, such as mirrors and planar or spher-
ical boundaries between different optical media. Ray propagation in inhomogeneous
(graded-index) optical media is examined in Sec. 1.3. Graded-index optics is the basis
of a technology that has become an important part of modern optics.

Optical components are often centered about an optical axis, with respect to which
the rays travel at small inclinations. Such rays are called paraxial rays and the as-
sumption that the rays have this property is the basis of paraxial optics. The change in
the position and inclination of a paraxial ray as it travels through an optical system can
be efficiently described by the use of a 2 x 2-matrix algebra. Section 1.4 is devoted to
this algebraic tool, which is known as matrix optics.

1.1 POSTULATES OF RAY OPTICS

Postulates of Ray Optics

и Light travels in the form of rays. The rays are emitted by light sources and can

be observed when they reach an optical detector.

= An optical medium is characterized by a quantity п, > 1, called the refractive

index. The refractive index n = c,/c where со is the speed of light in free space
and c is the speed of light in the medium. Therefore, the time taken by light to
travel a distance d is d/c = nd/co. It is proportional to the product nd, which
is known as the optical pathlength.

= In an inhomogeneous medium the refractive index n(r) is a function of the

position г = (x,y, z). The optical pathlength along a given path between two
points A and B is therefore
B
Optical pathlength = ] n(r) ds, (1.1-1)
A
where ds is the differential element of length along the path. The time taken by
light to travel from A to B is proportional to the optical pathlength.

6 CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS

= Fermat’s Principle. Optical rays traveling between two points, A and В, fol-
low a path such that the time of travel (or the optical pathlength) between the
two points is an extremum relative to neighboring paths. This is expressed
mathematically as

B
5 | n(r) ds = 0, (1.1-2)
A
where the symbol д, which is read “the variation of,” signifies that the optical
pathlength is either minimized or maximized, or is a point of inflection. It is,
however, usually a minimum, in which case:
Light rays travel along the path of least time.

Sometimes the minimum time is shared by more than one path, which are then
all followed simultaneously by the rays. An example in which the pathlength is
maximized is provided in Prob. 1.1-2.

In this chapter we use the postulates of ray optics to determine the rules governing
the propagation of light rays, their reflection and refraction at the boundaries between
different media, and their transmission through various optical components. A wealth
of results applicable to numerous optical systems are obtained without the need for any
other assumptions or rules regarding the nature of light.

Propagation in a Homogeneous Medium

In a homogeneous medium the refractive index is the same everywhere, and so is the
speed of light. The path of minimum time, required by Fermat’s principle, is therefore
also the path of minimum distance. The principle of the path of minimum distance
is known as Hero’s principle. The path of minimum distance between two points is
a straight line so that in a homogeneous medium, light rays travel in straight lines
(Fig. 1.1-1).

Figure 1.1-1 Light rays travel in straight lines. Shadows are perfect projections of stops.

1.1 POSTULATES OF RAY OPTICS 7
Reflection from a Mirror
Mirrors are made of certain highly polished metallic surfaces, or metallic or dielectric
films deposited on a substrate such as glass. Light reflects from mirrors in accordance
with the law of reflection:
The reflected ray lies in the plane of incidence; the angle of reflection equals the
angle of incidence.
The plane of incidence is the plane formed by the incident ray and the normal to the
mirror at the point of incidence. The angles of incidence and reflection, 0 and 6’, are
defined in Fig. 1.1-2(a). To prove the law of reflection we simply use Hero’s principle.
Examine a ray that travels from point A to point C’ after reflection from the planar
mirror in Fig. 1.1-2(b). According to Hero’s principle, for a mirror of infinitesimal
thickness, the distance АВ + ВС must be minimum. If C’ is a mirror image of C, then
BC = BC’, so that AB + BC’ must be a minimum. This occurs when АВС’ is a
straight line, 1.е., when В coincides with В’ so that 0 = 6’.
Plane of
Incidence
Mirror № Митог
7 Cc Cc!
Reflected = a ° a
ray |. x “
9 XX 0’ sy “
a 0 В
Normal “8 Lon
to mirror A
Incident
ray
(a) (b)
Figure 1.1-2 (а) Reflection from the surface of a curved mirror. (b) Geometrical construction to
prove the law of reflection.
Reflection and Refraction at the Boundary Between Two Media
At the boundary between two media of refractive indices пл and 72 an incident ray is
split into two — a reflected ray and a refracted (or transmitted) ray (Fig. 1.1-3). The
reflected ray obeys the law of reflection. The refracted ray obeys the law of refraction:
The refracted ray lies in the plane of incidence; the angle of refraction 62 is
related to the angle of incidence 01 by Snell’s law,
Snell’s Law
The proportion in which the light is reflected and refracted is not described by ray
optics.

8 — СНАРТЕВ1 RAY OPTICS
Reflected /
ray > /
|
1
Normal to № / Refracted
boundary Г —T % i ray
М
. | Plane of
Incident ЕЕ incidence
ray Ny
ny
Figure 1.1-3 Reflection and refraction at the boundary between two media.
НИ
EXERCISE 1.1-1
Proof of Snell’s Law. The proof of Snell’s law is an exercise in the application of Fermat’s
principle. Referring to Fig. 1.1-4, we seek to minimize the optical pathlength п: AB+n2BC between
points A and С. We therefore have the following optimization problem: Minimize nid sec 91 +
п2 42 sec 95 with respect to the angles 91 and 62, subject to the condition d; tan; + dz tan 05 = d.
Show that the solution of this constrained minimization problem yields Snell’s law.
ny | 2
jo С
9> |
9 B Figure 1.1-4 Construction to prove Snell’s law.
1 а
НИ
The three simple rules — propagation in straight lines and the laws of reflection and
refraction — are applied in Sec. 1.2 to several geometrical configurations of mirrors
and transparent optical components, without further recourse to Fermat’s principle.
1.2 SIMPLE OPTICAL COMPONENTS
A. Mirrors
Planar Mirrors
A planar mirror reflects the rays originating from a point Р! such that the reflected rays
appear to originate from a point P behind the mirror, called the image (Fig. 1.2-1).
Paraboloidal Mirrors
The surface of a paraboloidal mirror is a reflective paraboloid of revolution. It has the
useful property of focusing all incident rays parallel to its axis to a single point, called
the focus or focal point. The distance РЁ = f defined in Fig. 1.2-2 is known as

1.2 SIMPLE OPTICALCOMPONENTS 9
the focal length. Paraboloidal mirrors are often used as light-collecting elements in
telescopes. They are also used to render parallel the rays from a point source of light,
such as a flashlight bulb or a light-emitting diode, located at the focus. When used in
this manner, the device is known as a collimator.

Mirror
Mirror
|. м —— Ро
Е 3
P 1 Р› J f —
Figure 1.2-1 Reflection of light гот а planar Figure 1.2-2 Focusing of light by а parabo-
mirror. loidal mirror.
Elliptical Mirrors
An elliptical mirror reflects all the rays emitted from one of its two foci, e.g., P,, and
images them onto the other focus, P (Fig. 1.2-3). In accordance with Hero’s principle,
the distances traveled by the light from P; to Р› along any of the paths are equal.
LZ \
_ Va © — Figure 1.2-3 Reflection from an elliptical
5 f mirror.
Spherical Mirrors
A spherical mirror is easier to fabricate than a paraboloidal mirror or an elliptical
mirror. However, it has neither the focusing property of the paraboloidal mirror nor the
imaging property of the elliptical mirror. As illustrated in Fig. 1.2-4, parallel rays meet
the axis at different points; their envelope (the dashed curve) is called the caustic curve.
Nevertheless, parallel rays close to the axis are approximately focused onto a single
point F’ at distance (—R)/2 from the mirror center С’. By convention, the radius of
curvature А is negative for concave mirrors and positive for convex mirrors.
Paraxial Rays Reflected from Spherical Mirrors
Rays that make small angles (such that sin? = 0) with the mirror’s axis are called
paraxial rays. In the paraxial approximation, where only paraxial rays are consid-
ered, a spherical mirror has a focusing property like that of the paraboloidal mirror and
an imaging property like that of the elliptical mirror. The body of rules that results from
this approximation forms paraxial optics, also called first-order optics or Gaussian
optics.

10 — СНАРТЕВ1 RAY OPTICS
о Spherical per nS
aa —^ mirror ra `\
р В
A С. Е, j | С Е Р z
Ч. eae в _В
Си 4 PI SPR
Figure 1.2-4 Reflection of parallel rays Figure 1.2-5 A spherical mirror approxi-
from a concave spherical mirror. mates a paraboloidal mirror for paraxial rays.

A spherical mirror of radius R therefore acts like a paraboloidal mirror of focal
length f = R/2. This is, in fact, plausible since at points near the axis, a parabola
can be approximated by a circle with radius equal to the parabola’s radius of curvature
(Fig. 1.2-5).

All paraxial rays originating from each point on the axis of a spherical mirror are
reflected and focused onto a single corresponding point on the axis. This can be seen
(Fig. 1.2-6) by examining a ray emitted at an angle 6; from a point P, at a distance 21
away from a concave mirror of radius А, and reflecting at angle (—62) to meet the axis
at a point P» that is a distance 22 away from the mirror. The angle 62 is negative since
the ray is traveling downward. Since the three angles of a triangle add to 180°, we have
6; = 09 — 0 and (—62) = 0 + 0, so that (—05) + 0; = 20%. If 4p is sufficiently small,
the approximation tan бо = 69 may be used, so that 09 = y/(—R), from which

2y
where y is the height of the point at which the reflection occurs. Recall that R is
negative since the mirror is concave. Similarly, if 6; and 02 are small, 01 = y/z
and (—62) = у/22, so that (1.2-1) yields у/21 + у/22 = 2y/(—R), whereupon
1 1 2
а. (1.2-2)
АЛ #2 (—R)
9
=7”\ ft
=! Sen "i
—] —,\ = 4
< iP Ci 4% СР iF
z м (-К) 22 (-Ю)/2 0
Figure 1.2-6 Reflection of paraxial rays from a concave spherical mirror of radius R < 0.

1.2 SIMPLE OPTICAL COMPONENTS 11

This relation holds regardless of y (1.е., regardless of 91) as long as the approxima-
tion is valid. This means that all paraxial rays originating from point P; arrive at Ро.
The distances 21 and 22 are measured in a coordinate system in which the z axis points
to the left. Points of negative z therefore lie to the right of the mirror.

According to (1.2-2), rays that are emitted from a point very far out on the z axis
(21 = co) are focused to a point F' at a distance z2 = (—R)/2. This means that within
the paraxial approximation, all rays coming from infinity (parallel to the axis of the
mirror) are focused to a point at a distance } from the mirror, which is known as its
focal length:

(—R)
Focal Length
Spherical Mirror
Equation (1.2-2) is usually written in the form
1 1 1
—+—=-, (1.2-4)
и о № f Imaging Equation
(Paraxial Rays)
which is known as the imaging equation. Both the incident and the reflected rays must
be paraxial for this equation to hold.
[|
EXERCISE 1.2-1
Image Formation by a Spherical Mirror. Show that, within the paraxial approximation, rays
originating from a point P, = (y1, 21) are reflected to a point Р» = (y2, 22), where 21 and 25 satisfy
(1.2-4) and уз = —Yy1 22/21 (Fig. 1.2-7). This means that rays from each point in the plane z = 21
meet at a single corresponding point in the plane z = 25, so that the mirror acts as ап image-formation
system with magnification —22 /21. Negative magnification means that the image is inverted.
У
P\=(y,; <)
VS Sem
' | Figure 1.2-7 Image formation by a
— —= spherical mirror. Four particular rays are
illustrated.

Р.=(у», <>)
ee
B. Planar Boundaries
The relation between the angles of refraction and incidence, 02 and 01, at a planar
boundary between two media of refractive indices пл and nz is governed by Snell’s
law (1.1-3). This relation is plotted in Fig. 1.2-8 for two cases:

= External Refraction (nj < nz). When the ray is incident from the medium of

smaller refractive index, 05 < 6, and the refracted ray bends away from the
boundary.

12 CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS
и Internal Refraction (nj > ng). If the incident ray is in a medium of higher
refractive index, 02 > 01 and the refracted ray bends toward the boundary.

ny Ny п Ny 9.

90°
20
95
9.
G LEE la
External refraction Internal refraction
Figure 1.2-8 Relation between the angles of refraction and incidence.

The refracted rays bend in such a way as to minimize the optical pathlength, 1.е.,
to increase the pathlength in the lower-index medium at the expense of pathlength in
the higher-index medium. In both cases, when the angles are small (1.е., the rays are
paraxial), the relation between 95 and 01 is approximately linear, n16; & n262, or
Total Internal Reflection
For internal refraction (па > nz), the angle of refraction is greater than the angle of
incidence, 95 > 01, so that as 9. increases, 95 reaches 90° when 6; = @,, the critical
angle (see Fig. 1.2-8). This occurs when пл sin 9. = nz sin(7/2) = no, so that

. 4 n
6. =sin7! =. (1.2-5)
т Critical Angle
When 6, > 69%, Snell’s law (1.1-3) cannot be satisfied and refraction does not occur.
The incident ray is then totally reflected as if the surface were a perfect mirror [Fig. 1.2-
9(a)]. This phenomenon, called total internal reflection (TIR), is the basis of many
optical devices and systems, such as reflecting prisms [Fig. 1.2-9(6)], light-emitting
diode collimators (Fig. 1.2-14), and optical fibers (Sec. 1.2D). Electromagnetic optics
(Fresnel’s equations in Chapter 6) reveals that all of the energy is carried by the
reflected light so that the process of total internal reflection is highly efficient.
“| "> №
45°
в
0 NX
IN 45°
— .
= K-
YD m= |
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 1.2-9 (a) Total internal reflection at a planar boundary. (6) The reflecting prism. If n, > 2
and nz = 1 (air), then 0, < 45°; since no = 1.5 > V2 for glass, and 0, = 45°, the ray is totally
reflected. (c) Rays are guided by total internal reflection from the internal surface of an optical fiber.

1.2 SIMPLE OPTICALCOMPONENTS 13
Prisms
A prism of apex angle а and refractive index n (Fig. 1.2-10) deflects a ray incident at
an angle @ by an angle
6,=0—-a+sin! lv п? —sin?@ sina — sin 6 cos a . (1.2-6)
This equation is arrived at by using Snell’s law twice, at the two refracting surfaces
of the prism. When a is very small (thin prism) and @ is also very small (paraxial
approximation), (1.2-6) may be approximated by
9а = (п- Та. (1.2-7)
“CTT
№ и“ и a= 45°
Аи аа
хи 40° —\ р И
TONES a
rie, a= 10°
7 wl ET
nt Pree
err | |
poll
0° 9 90°
Figure 1.2-10 (a) Ray deflection by a prism. (6) Graph of (1.2-6) for the deflection angle 64 as a
function of the angle of incidence 9, for different apex angles a and n = 1.5. When both a and @ are
small the angle of deflection 04 = (п — 1)a, which is approximately independent of 0, as is evident
for the a = 10° curve. When 6 = 0° and a = 45°, total internal reflection occurs, as illustrated in
Fig. 1.2-9(b).
Beamsplitters
The beamsplitter is an optical component that splits an incident ray into a reflected ray
and a transmitted ray, as illustrated in Fig. 1.2-11. The relative proportions of light
transmitted and reflected are established by Fresnel’s equations in electromagnetic
optics (Chapter 6). Beamsplitters are also frequently used to combine two light rays
into one [Fig. 1.2-11(<)]. Beamsplitters are usually constructed by depositing a thin
semitransparent metallic or dielectric film on a glass substrate. A thin bare glass plate,
such as a microscope slide, can also serve as a beamsplitter although the fraction of
light reflected is small. Transparent plastic materials are often used in place of glass.
(a) Partially reflective mirror (b) Thin glass plate (c) Beam combiner
Figure 1.2-11  Beamsplitters and beam combiners.

14. CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS
Beam Directors
Simple optical components can be used to direct rays in particular directions. The
devices illustrated in Fig. 1.2-12 redirect incident rays into rays tilted at fixed angles
with respect to each other. The biprism depicted in Fig. 1.2-12(a) is the juxtaposition
of a prism and an identical inverted prism. The Fresnel biprism portrayed in Fig. 1.2-
12(b) is formed from rows of adjacently placed tiny prisms. This device is equivalent to
a biprism but is thinner and lighter. The cone-shaped optic depicted in Fig. 1.2-12(c),
known as an axicon, converts incident rays into a collection of circularly symmetric
rays directed toward its central axis in the form of a cone. It has the same cross section
as the biprism, namely an isosceles triangle.
\———
\> Figure 1.2-12 (а) Biprism. (5) Fresnel
biprism. (c) Plano-convex axicon.
(a) (b) (c)

C. Spherical Boundaries and Lenses
We now examine the refraction of rays from a spherical boundary of radius R between
two media of refractive indices n; and nz. By convention, В is positive for a convex
boundary and negative for a concave boundary. The results are obtained by applying
Snell’s law, which relates the angles of incidence and refraction relative to the normal
to the surface, defined by the radius vector from the center С. These angles are to
be distinguished from the angles 6; and 95, which are defined relative to the z axis.
Considering only paraxial rays making small angles with the axis of the system so that
sin? = 9 and tan@ = 0, the following properties may be shown to hold:

и А ray making an angle 6; with the z axis and meeting the boundary at a point of
height у where it makes an angle 69 with the radius vector [see Fig. 1.2-13(a)]
changes direction at the boundary so that the refracted ray makes an angle 05 with
the z axis and an angle 93 with the radius vector. With the help of Exercise 1.2-2,
we obtain n no—n

6,2 19, Е, (1.2-8)
ng ng R
|
(a) 9 (-02) р
UR ee > Te
ny Ny
м Figure 1.2-13 Refraction at а
y convex spherical boundary (R > 0).
P)=(1.2))
_|
ОИ =
Ро = (у, 52)

1.2 SIMPLE OPTICAL COMPONENTS 15
= All paraxial rays originating from a point Р, = (y1, 21) in the z = 21 plane meet
at a point Р› = (yo, 22) in the z = 22 plane (see Exercise 1.2-2), where
n n п2 — п
в (1.2-9)
А 22 R
and ny 22
y= —-S 2 yy. (1.2-10)
N2 21
The z = 21 and z = 22 planes are said to be conjugate planes. Every point
in the first plane has a corresponding point (image) in the second with magnifi-
cation — (п1 /12)(22/21). Again, negative magnification means that the image is
inverted. By convention P, is measured in a coordinate system pointing to the left
and P, in a coordinate system pointing to the right (e.g., if P2 lies to the left of
the boundary, then zz would be negative).

The similarities between these properties and those of the spherical mirror are evi-
dent. It is important to remember that the image formation properties described above
are approximate. They hold only for paraxial rays. Rays of large angles do not obey
these paraxial laws; the deviation results in image distortion called aberration.
ee
EXERCISE 1.2-2
Image Formation. Derive (1.2-8). Prove that paraxial rays originating from P, pass through P,
when (1.2-9) and (1.2-10) are satisfied.

EXERCISE 1.2-3
Aberration-Free Imaging Surface. Determine the equation of a convex aspherical (nonspheri-
cal) surface between media of refractive indices n; and nz such that all rays (not necessarily paraxial)
from an axial point P, at a distance 21 to the left of the surface are imaged onto an axial point P at
a distance 22 to the right of the surface [Fig. 1.2-13(a)]. Hint: In accordance with Fermat’s principle
the optical pathlengths between the two points must be equal for all paths.
ee
a
EXAMPLE 1.2-1. СоШтаюг for LED Light. Light emitted by an LED (Sec. 18.1) is often
collimated by making use of an optic whose surface takes the form of a paraboloid of revolution
(Fig. 1.2-14). The LED is placed at the focus of the paraboloid by inserting its hemispherical dome
(darker blue) into a recess formed in the narrow end of the optic. Rays emanating from the sides of
the LED dome impinge on the paraboloidal boundary at angles of incidence greater than the critical
angle and are thus reflected out of the device via total internal reflection. Rays emanating from the
central portion of the LED dome are refracted out of the device at the spherical boundary. Optical
systems that combine reflection and refraction are known as catadioptric systems.
Reflected rays Refracted rays Reflected rays
Figure 1.2-14 Cross section of a collimator for
\ Бои, Wi LED light. LED collimators come in many config-
м ye Se, py urations but most make use of both total internal
\ reflection and refraction to provide rays of light
Total SN We that are approximately parallel at the exit. Such
neal SY devices are often fabricated from molded acrylic or
reflection US LA, eS polycarbonate plastic, which have refractive indices
i= WW Sy similar to that of glass (п = 1.5). The diameter of
< № the narrow end of the optic illustrated is = 1 ст.
ини |

16 CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS
Spherical Lenses
A spherical lens is bounded by two spherical surfaces. It is, therefore, defined com-
pletely by the radii А! and Ro of its two surfaces, its thickness A, and the refractive
index п of the material (Fig. 1.2-15). A glass lens in air can be regarded as а combina-
tion of two spherical boundaries, air-to-glass and glass-to-air.
aa - Figure 1.2-15 A biconvex spherical lens.
A ray crossing the first surface at height у and angle @; with the z axis [Fig. 1.2-
16(a)] is traced by applying (1.2-8) at the first surface to obtain the inclination angle
9 of the refracted ray, which we extend until it meets the second surface. We then use
(1.2-8) once more with 9 replacing 091 to obtain the inclination angle 62 of the ray after
refraction from the second surface. The results are in general complex. When the lens
is thin, however, it can be assumed that the incident ray emerges from the lens at about
the same height y at which it enters. Under this assumption, the following relations
obtain:
= The angles of the refracted and incident rays are related by (see Exercise 1.2-4)
6, = 6, — 4%, (1.2-11)
f
where }, called the focal length, is given by
1 1 1
= =(n-1) ( — ) . (1.2-12)
f Ri В Focal Length
Thin Spherical Lens
41 (tn) Рог) |
У
[| F
. © чи
V Po=(V7,2)
51 0 5 zy 0 f 2%
(a) (b)
Figure 1.2-16 (a) Ray bending by a thin lens. (b) Image formation by a thin lens.
= All rays originating from a point P) = (y1, 21) meet at a point Р› = (yp, 22)
[Fig. 1.2-16(6)] (see Exercise 1.2-4), where
1 1 1
a (1.2-13)
и 2 f Imaging Equation

1.2 SIMPLE OPTICALCOMPONENTS 17
and
22
=. (1.2-14)
41 Magnification
These results are identical to those for the spherical mirror [see (1.2-4) and Exer-
cise 1.2-1].

These equations indicate that each point in the z = 21 plane is imaged onto a
corresponding point in the z = z plane with the magnification factor —22/21. The
magnification is unity when 21 = 22 = 2f. The focal length f of a lens therefore
completely determines its effect on paraxial rays. As indicated earlier, P, and P, are
measured in coordinate systems pointing to the left and right, respectively, and the
radii of curvatures Дл and Rez are positive for convex surfaces and negative for concave
surfaces. For the biconvex lens shown in Fig. 1.2-15, Вл is positive and Rz is negative,
so that the two terms of (1.2-12) add and provide a positive {}.
НИ
EXERCISE 1.2-4
Proof of the Thin Lens Formulas. Using (1.2-8), along with the definition of the focal length
given in (1.2-12), prove (1.2-11) and (1.2-13).
НИ

It is emphasized once again that the foregoing relations hold only for paraxial rays.
The presence of nonparaxial rays results in aberrations, as illustrated in Fig. 1.2-17.

Д
а
М Figure 1.2-17 Nonparaxial rays do not meet
А я == at the paraxial focus. The dashed envelope of the
a a refracted rays is known as the caustic curve.
ЕЕ
\ |
у
Convex and Concave Lenses
Lenses are transparent optical devices that bend rays in a manner prescribed by the
shapes of their surfaces. Most common lenses, such as the biconvex lens considered
above, are spherical lenses. Lenses that consist of a single piece of material (glass and
plastic are favored in the visible) are called simple lenses, while lenses that comprise
multiple simple lenses, usually along a common axis, are known as compound lenses.

The surface of a lens can be convex or concave, depending on whether it projects
out of, or recedes into the body of the lens, respectively, or it can be planar, indicating
that it has a flat surface. A cylindrical lens is curved in only one direction; it thus has
a focal length f for rays in the y—z plane, and no focusing power for rays in the x—-z
plane. A lens in which one surface is convex and the other concave is called a meniscus
lens (these are often used for spectacles). A lens in which one or both surfaces have a
shape that is neither spherical nor cylindrical is known as an aspheric lens.

18 — CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS

Several different types of lenses are illustrated in Fig. 1.2-18. Biconvex and plano-
convex lenses result in the convergence of rays and are useful for image formation,
as depicted in Fig. 1.2-16. Biconcave and plano-concave lenses lead to the diver-
gence of rays and are used in projection and focal-length expansion. A Fresnel lens
is constructed by removing the nonrefracting portions of a conventional lens. Hence,
the Fresnel-lens equivalent [Fig. 1.2-18(e)] of а plano-convex lens [Fig. 1.2-18(6)]
is a flattened set of concentric surfaces with identical curvature at all locations on
the surface (except at the stepwise discontinuities). The Fresnel design allows for
the construction of thin, light, and inexpensive plastic lenses with sizes that range
from meters to micrometers and short focal lengths. Fresnel lenses can be converging,
diverging, or cylindrical.

Figure 1.2-18 Lenses: (a)
Biconvex; (b) Plano-convex;
(c) Concave; (4)  Plano-
concave. (e) Fresnel-lens
: : 2 : counterpart of the plano-
convex lens displayed in
(b); the curvatures are the
same everywhere on the two
(а) (Ь) (с) (4) (e) surfaces.
D. Light Guides
Light may be guided from one location to another by use of a set of lenses or mirrors,
as illustrated schematically in Fig. 1.2-19. Since refractive elements (such as lenses)
are usually partially reflective and since mirrors are partially absorptive, the cumula-
tive loss of optical power will be significant when the number of guiding elements
is large. Components in which these effects are minimized can be fabricated (e.g.,
antireflection-coated lenses), but the system is generally cumbersome and costly.
—
» «ЕЕ
—
© ыы
Figure 1.2-19 Guiding light: (а) lenses; (5) mirrors; (с) total internal reflection.

An ideal mechanism for guiding light is that of total internal reflection at the bound-
ary between two media of different refractive indices. Rays are reflected repeatedly
without undergoing refraction. Glass fibers of high chemical purity are used to guide
light for tens of kilometers with relatively low loss of optical power.

An optical fiber is a light conduit made of two concentric glass (or plastic) cylinders
(Fig. 1.2-20). The inner, called the core, has a refractive index n,, and the outer, called

1.2 SIMPLE OPTICAL COMPONENTS 19
the cladding, has a slightly smaller refractive index, no < та. Light rays traveling in
the core are totally reflected from the cladding if their angle of incidence is greater
than the critical angle, 9 > 0. = зш '(п2/пл). The rays making an angle 0 = 90° —0
with the optical axis are therefore confined in the fiber core if 9 < 0., where 0, =
90° — 0. = cos-!(ng/nz). Optical fibers are used in optical communication systems
(see Chapters 10 and 25). Some important properties of optical fibers are derived in
Exercise 1.2-5.

Cladding
Core pS
Figure 1.2-20 The optical fiber. Light rays are guided by multiple total internal reflections. Here
9 represents the angle measured from the axis of the optical fiber so that its complement 9 = 90° — 9
is the angle of incidence at the dielectric interface.
НИ
EXERCISE 1.2-5
Numerical Aperture and Angle of Acceptance of an Optical Fiber. An optical fiber
is illuminated by light from a source (e.g., a light-emitting diode, LED). The refractive indices of
the core and cladding of the fiber are n; and 72, respectively, and the refractive index of air is 1
(see Fig. 1.2-21). Show that the half-angle 0, of the cone of rays accepted by the fiber (transmitted
through the fiber without undergoing refraction at the cladding) is given by
NA =sin0, = \/n? — п. (1.2-15)
Numerical Aperture
Optical Fiber
The angle 0, is called the acceptance angle and the parameter NA = sin@, is known as the
numerical aperture of the fiber. Calculate the numerical aperture and acceptance angle for a silica-
glass fiber with п: = 1.475 and nz = 1.460. Silica glass, also known as fused silica, is amorphous
silicon dioxide ($102). It is widely used because of its excellent optical and mechanical properties.
Moreover, its refractive index can be readily modified by doping (e.g., with GeO).
Cladding По
Air
Oe Core 1%
— fe Pe Re
ба
[р
Figure 1.2-21 Acceptance angle of an optical fiber.
ee
Trapping of Light in Media of High Refractive Index
It is often difficult for light originating inside a medium of large refractive index to
be extracted into air, especially if the surfaces of the medium are parallel. This occurs
since certain rays undergo multiple total internal reflections without ever refracting into
air. The principle is illustrated in Exercise 1.2-6.

20 =CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS
ee
EXERCISE 1.2-6

Light Trapped in a Light-Emitting Diode.

(a) Assume that light is generated in all directions inside a material of refractive index n cut in the
shape of a parallelepiped (Fig. 1.2-22). The material is surrounded by air with unity refractive
index. This process occurs in light-emitting diodes (see Sec. 18.1B). What is the angle of the
cone of light rays (inside the material) that will emerge from each face? What happens to the
other rays? What is the numerical value of this angle for GaAs (n = 3.6)?

! №
АР ИА
C) К Figure 1.2-22 Trapping of light in а рага|-
Е Я lelepiped of high refractive index.

(b) Assume that when light is generated isotropically the amount of optical power associated with
the rays in a given cone is proportional to the solid angle of the cone. Show that the ratio of
the optical power that is extracted from the material to the total generated optical power is
3 (1 —/1—1/n? ). provided that n > \2. What is the numerical value of this ratio for GaAs?

ee

1.3 GRADED-INDEX OPTICS

A graded-index (GRIN) material has a refractive index that varies with position in

accordance with a continuous function n(r). These materials are often fabricated by

adding impurities (dopants) of controlled concentrations. In a GRIN medium the optical
rays follow curved trajectories, instead of straight lines. By appropriate choice of

n(r), a GRIN plate can have the same effect on light rays as a conventional optical

component, such as a prism or lens.

A. The Ray Equation

To determine the trajectories of light rays in an inhomogeneous medium with refractive

index n(r), we use Fermat’s principle,

B
| n(r) ds = 0, (1.3-1)
A

where ds is a differential length along the ray trajectory between A and B. If the

trajectory is described by the function x(s), y(s), and z(s), where s is the length of the

trajectory (Fig. 1.3-1), then using the calculus of variations it can be shown that’ x(s),

1 See, e.g., К. Weinstock, Calculus of Variations: With Applications to Physics and Engineering, 1952; Dover,

1974.

1.3 GRADED-INDEX OPTICS 21
y(s), and z(s) must satisfy three partial differential equations,
d nit _ дп а nt _ On d „42 _ On (13-2)
аз \ 4] Ox’ ds \ 4) Oy’ ds\ ds} 02’ |
By defining the vector r(s), whose components are x(s), y(s), and z(s), (1.3-2) may
be written in the compact vector form
d а
р (=) — Уп, (1.3-3)
ds \\ ds Ray Equation
where Vn, the gradient of п, is a vector with Cartesian components дт/дх, On/Oy,
and On/0z. Equation (1.3-3) is known as the ray equation.
‘_< >
B Figure 1.3-1 The ray trajectory is described
parametrically by three functions 1(5), y(s), and
z(s), or by two functions x(z) and y(z).
Ц

One approach to solving the ray equation is to describe the trajectory by two func-
tions x(z) and y(z), write ds = 42\/1+ (da/dz)? + (dy/dz)?, and substitute in
(1.3-3) to obtain two partial differential equations for x(z) and y(z). The algebra is
generally not trivial, but it simplifies considerably when the paraxial approximation is
used.

The Paraxial Ray Equation
In the paraxial approximation, the trajectory is almost parallel to the z axis, so that
ds & dz (Fig. 1.3-2). The ray equations (1.3-2) then simplify to
d а д d d д
— Ga = at — Ga we (1.3-4)
dz dz Ox dz \ dz Oy Paraxial
Ray Equations
Given n = n(x, у, 2), these two partial differential equations may be solved for the
trajectory x(z) and y(z).

In the limiting case of ahomogeneous medium for which n is independent of x, у, z,
(1.3-4) gives 425/422 = 0 and d?y/dz? = 0, from which it follows that x and у are
linear functions of z, so that the trajectories are straight lines. More interesting cases
will be examined subsequently.

22  CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS
x
"|
<
Figure 1.3-2 Trajectory of a paraxial ray in а graded-index medium.

B. Graded-Index Optical Components
Graded-Index Slab
Consider a slab of material whose refractive index n = n(y) is uniform in the x and
z directions but varies continuously in the y direction (Fig. 1.3-3). The trajectories of
paraxial rays in the y—z plane are described by the paraxial ray equation

d d dn

и) =, (1.3-5)

dz \ dz dy

from which

d? 1 dn
= 1 dnty) (1.3-6)
dz n(y) dy
Given n(y) and initial conditions (y and dy/dz at z = 0), (1.3-6) can be solved for the
function y(z), which describes the ray trajectories.
| y
7 :
ytay A(y+Ay) n(y)+ dy Ay
y ny)
5 Refractive index
Figure 1.3-3 Refraction in a graded-index slab.

L] Derivation of the Paraxial Ray Equation in a Graded-Index Slab Using Snell’s Law.
Equation (1.3-6) may also be derived by the direct use of Snell’s law (Fig. 1.3-3). Let 0(y) = dy/dz
be the angle that the ray makes with the z axis at the position (y, z). After traveling through a layer
of thickness Ay the ray changes its angle to 6(y + Ay). The two angles are related by Snell’s law
where 0, as defined in Fig. 1.3-3, is the complement of the angle of incidence (refraction):

n(y) cos (у) = п(у + Ay) cos A(y + Ay)
d 49
= | nt) + i As] cos 9(у) — ty Ay sin у) , (1.3-7)
where we have applied the expansion /(у- Ду) = f(y) + (df /dy) Ay to the functions f(y) = n(y)
and f(y) = cos@(y). In the limit Ay - 0, after eliminating the term in (Ay)?, we obtain the
differential equation
dn dé
— =n— tané. 1.3-8
dy n dy an ( )
For paraxial rays 0 is very small so that tand = 9. Substituting 9 = dy/dz in (1.3-8), we obtain
(1.3-6). ||

1.3 GRADED-INDEX OPTICS 23
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 1.3-1. Slab with Parabolic Index Profile. An important particular distribution
for the graded refractive index is

п? (у) = ng (1- а?у?). (1.3-9)
This is a symmetric function of y that has its maximum value at y = 0 (Fig. 1.3-4). А glass slab with
this profile is known by the trade name SELFOC. Usually, a is chosen to be sufficiently small so that
a’ у? <1 for all у of interest. Under this condition, n(y) = по V/1 — a?y? © no(1 — say”); i.e.,
n(y) is a parabolic distribution. Also, because n(y) — 70 < по, the fractional change of the refractive
index is very small. Taking the derivative of (1.3-9), the right-hand side of (1.3-6) is (1/n)dn/dy =
—(no/n)?a*y = —a?y, so that (1.3-6) becomes
d’y 2
a2 я —а^у. (1.3-10)
The solutions of this equation are harmonic functions with period 27/a. Assuming an initial position
y(0) = yo and an initial slope dy/dz = во at = = 0 inside the GRIN medium,
90 ..
y(z) = yo cosaz + — sinaz, (1.3-11)
a
from which the slope of the trajectory is
dy ;
9(=) = 1; = а sin az + 09 cos az. (1.3-12)
z
The ray oscillates about the center of the slab with a period (distance) 277/a@ known as the pitch, as
illustrated in Fig. 1.3-4.
У У
и
У
a
у = mol ny)
Figure 1.3-4 Trajectory of a ray in a GRIN slab of parabolic index profile (SELFOC).
The maximum excursion of the ray is Ynax = Ys + (A0/a)? and the maximum angle is Onax =
QYmax- The validity of this approximate analysis is ensured if Onax < 1. If 2ymax is smaller than
the thickness of the slab, the ray remains confined and the slab serves as a light guide. Figure 1.3-5
shows the trajectories of a number of rays transmitted through a SELFOC slab. Note that all rays have
the same pitch. This GRIN slab may be used as a lens, as demonstrated in Exercise 1.3-1.
a
Qa
<
ОАО ООО ити
Figure 1.3-5 Trajectories of rays from an external point source in a SELFOC slab.
«ПИ

24 — СНАРТЕА1 RAY OPTICS
ee
EXERCISE 1.3-1
The GRIN Slab as a Lens. Show that a SELFOC slab of length 4 < л/2а and refractive index
given by (1.3-9) acts as a cylindrical lens (a lens with focusing power in the y—z plane) of focal length
fxr : (1.3-13)
~ noasin(ad) * :
Show that the principal point (defined in Fig. 1.3-6) lies at a distance from the slab edge АН =
(1/noa) tan(ad/2). Sketch the ray trajectories in the special cases d = п/а and п /2а.
y .
[laa
Yo See
| Figure 1.3-6 The SELFOC slab used as
я > a lens; Е is the focal point and Н is the
Е principal point.

——
НИ
Graded-Index Fibers
A graded-index fiber is a glass cylinder with a refractive index n that varies as a
function of the radial distance from its axis. In the paraxial approximation, the ray
trajectories are governed by the paraxial ray equations (1.3-4). Consider, for example,
the distribution

п? = ng [1—a? (27 +у))]. (1.3-14)
Substituting (1.3-14) into (1.3-4) and assuming that a?(x? + y?) < 1 for all x and у
of interest, we obtain
dx 2 Фу 2
— А-а х — А —ф ау. 1.3-15
1-2 de у ( )
Both «x and у are therefore harmonic functions of z with period 27/a. The initial
positions (xo, yo) and angles (6,9 = 45/42 and 6,9 = dy/dz) at z = 0 determine the
amplitudes and phases of these harmonic functions. Because of the circular symmetry,
there is no loss of generality in choosing то = 0. The solution of (1.3-15) is then
9
a(z) = —® sinaz
а (1.3-16)
Ayo .
y(z) = —— sinaz + yo cos az.
Qa
If 0.9 = 0, 1.е., the incident ray lies in a meridional plane (a plane passing through
the axis of the cylinder, in this case the y—z plane), the ray continues to lie in that plane
following a sinusoidal trajectory similar to that in the GRIN slab [Fig. 1.3-7(а)].
On the other hand, if 6,9 = 0, and 029 = ayo, then
x(z) = yosinaz
(1.3-17)
y(z) = yo cosaz,

1.3 GRADED-INDEX OPTICS 25
2a
a
Хх
is) an хх хх |
(а)
У
и
ИО =
(Б)
Figure 1.3-7 (a) Meridional and (6) helical rays in а graded-index fiber with parabolic index
profile.
so that the ray follows a helical trajectory lying on the surface of a cylinder of radius
yo [Fig. 1.3-7(6)]. In both cases the ray remains confined within the fiber, so that the
fiber serves as a light guide. Other helical patterns are generated with different incident
rays.

Graded-index fibers and their use in optical fiber communications are discussed in
Chapters 10 and 25.
ee
EXERCISE 1.3-2
Numerical Aperture of the Graded-Index Fiber. Consider a graded-index fiber with the
index profile provided in (1.3-14) and radius a. A ray is incident from air into the fiber at its center,
which then makes an angle 90 with the fiber axis in the medium (see Fig. 1.3-8). Show, in the paraxial
approximation, that the numerical aperture is

МА = sin@, = noaa, (1.3-18)
Numerical Aperture
Graded-Index Fiber
where 6, is the maximum acceptance angle for which the ray trajectory is confined within the fiber.
Compare this to the numerical aperture of a step-index fiber such as the one discussed in Exercise 1.2-
5. To make the comparison fair, take the refractive indices of the core and cladding of the step-index
fiber to be ny = no and nz = по УЛ — а?а? = no(1 — за?а?), respectively.
y
+
i +
ба
Figure 1.3-8 Acceptance angle of a graded-index optical fiber.

ee

26  CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS
*C. The Eikonal Equation

The ray trajectories are often characterized by the surfaces to which they are normal.
Let S(r) be a scalar function such that its equilevel surfaces, S(r) = constant, are
everywhere normal to the rays (Fig. 1.3-9). If $(г) is known, the ray trajectories can
readily be constructed since the normal to the equilevel surfaces at a position r is in the
direction of the gradient vector VS(r). The function S(r), called the eikonal, is akin
to the potential function У (г) in electrostatics; the role of the optical rays is played by
the lines of electric field E = —VV.

\ —” Rays Figure 1.3-9 Вау trajectories are normal to the surfaces

| of constant S(r).

—

y

i= S(r) = constant

To satisfy Fermat’s principle (which is the main postulate of ray optics) the eikonal
S(r) must satisfy a partial differential equation known as the eikonal equation,

95\*° (05\ (95.
a> — — | = 1.3-19
(a2) (в) + (5) =" их
which is usually written in the vector form
VS? =n’, (1.3-20)
Eikonal Equation
where |У 5?| = VS- VS. The proof of the eikonal equation from Fermat’s principle is
a mathematical exercise that lies beyond the scope of this book.’ Conversely, Fermat’s
principle (and the ray equation) can be shown to follow from the eikonal equation.
Therefore, either Fermat’s principle or the eikonal equation may be regarded as the
principal postulate of ray optics.

Integrating the eikonal equation (1.3-20) along a ray trajectory between points A

and B gives
B B
S(rg) — S(ra) = ] |VS| ds = ] nds = optical pathlength between A and В.
A A
(1.3-21)
This means that the difference 5 (гв)—5$ (гл) represents the optical pathlength between
A and B. In the electrostatics analogy, the optical pathlength plays the role of the
potential difference.

To determine the ray trajectories in an inhomogeneous medium of refractive index
n(r), we can either solve the ray equation (1.3-3), as we have done earlier, or solve the
eikonal equation for $ (г), from which we calculate the gradient VS.

1 Зее, e.g., М. Born and Е. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University Press, 7th expanded and corrected
ed. 2002.

1.4 MATRIXOPTICS 27

If the medium is homogeneous, i.e., n(r) is constant, the magnitude of VS is
constant, so that the wavefront normals (rays) must be straight lines. The surfaces
S(r) = constant may be parallel planes or concentric spheres, as illustrated in Fig. 1.3-
10.

S(r) = constant 7

oo us
—>
_ > 7”
—
—> Rays 3) — Rays
—>
—
—> —

—
Figure 1.3-10 Rays and surfaces of constant S(r) in a homogeneous medium.

The eikonal equation is revisited from the point-of-view of the relation between ray

optics and wave optics in Sec. 2.3.

1.4 MATRIX OPTICS
Matrix optics is a technique for tracing paraxial rays. The rays are assumed to travel
only within a single plane, so that the formalism is applicable to systems with planar
geometry and to meridional rays in circularly symmetric systems.

A ray is described by its position and its angle with respect to the optical axis. These
variables are altered as the ray travels through the system. In the paraxial approxima-
tion, the position and angle at the input and output planes of an optical system are
related by two linear algebraic equations. As a result, the optical system is described
by a2 x 2 matrix called the ray-transfer matrix.

The convenience of using matrix methods lies in the fact that the ray-transfer matrix
of a cascade of optical components (or systems) is a product of the ray-transfer matrices
of the individual components (or systems). Matrix optics therefore provides a formal
mechanism for describing complex optical systems in the paraxial approximation.

A. The Ray-Transfer Matrix

Consider a circularly symmetric optical system formed by a succession of refracting
and reflecting surfaces all centered about the same axis (optical axis). The z axis lies
along the optical axis and points in the general direction in which the rays travel.
Consider rays in a plane containing the optical axes, say the y—z plane. We proceed
to trace a ray as it travels through the system, i.e., as it crosses the transverse planes
at different axial distances. A ray crossing the transverse plane at z is completely
characterized by the coordinate of y of its crossing point and the angle 6 (Fig. 1.4-
1).

An optical system is a set of optical components placed between two transverse
planes at 21 and до, referred to as the input and output planes, respectively. The system
is characterized completely by its effect on an incoming ray of arbitrary position and
direction (ут, 01). It steers the ray so that it has new position and direction (y2, 02) at
the output plane (Fig. 1.4-2).

28 — СНАРТЕВ1 RAY OPTICS
Кау
9
У Figure 1.4-1 A ray is charac-
terized by its coordinate y and its
angle 0.
Optical
axis 5
Input Output
(1A) Optical system (2, 62)
y .
Input Output Figure 1.4-2 A ray enters an
plane 01 plane optical system at location 21 with
position у: and angle 9, and leaves
9> at position y and angle 65.
У Yo
Optical
Zy 52 < ах
In the paraxial approximation, when all angles are sufficiently small so that зш 9 =
9, the relation between (y2, 02) and (yi, 61) is linear and can generally be written in
the form
у2 = Ау + BO (1.4-1)
95 = Cy, + DO, (1.4-2)
where A, B, C, and D are real numbers. Equations (1.4-1) and (1.4-2) may be conve-
niently written in matrix form as
| А Bl lm _
НЕ 043)
The matrix M, whose elements are A, B, C, and D, characterizes the optical system
completely since it permits (y2, 05) to be determined for any (ут, 01). It is known as the
ray-transfer matrix. As will be seen in the examples provided in Sec. 1.4B, angles
that turn out to be negative point downward from the z axis in their direction of travel.
Radii that turn out to be negative indicate concave surfaces whereas those that are
positive indicate convex surfaces.
И
EXERCISE 1.4-1
Special Forms of the Ray-Transfer Matrix. Consider the following situations in which one
of the four elements of the ray-transfer matrix vanishes:
(a) Show that A = 0 represents a focusing system, in which all rays entering the system at a particular
angle, whatever their position, leave at a single position.
(b) Show that В = 0 represents an imaging system, in which all rays entering the system at a
particular position, whatever their angle, leave at a single position.
(c) What are the special features of a system for which C = 0 or D = 0?
ae

1.4 MATRIXOPTICS 29
B. Matrices of Simple Optical Components
Free-Space Propagation
Since rays travel along straight lines in a medium of uniform refractive index such as
free space, a ray traversing a distance d is altered in accordance with yo = y, + @,d
and 62 = 01. The ray-transfer matrix is therefore
та
М = В i . (1.4-4)
а
Refraction at a Planar Boundary
At a planar boundary between two media of refractive indices п and ng, the ray
angle changes in accordance with Snell’s law пл sin 6; = nzsin 05. In the paraxial
approximation, 2,6, = n262. The position of the ray is not altered, у› = y,. The
ray-transfer matrix is
ny ny
1
M = | и . (1.4-5)
n2
Refraction at a Spherical Boundary
The relation between 6, and 62 for paraxial rays refracted at a spherical boundary
between two media is provided in (1.2-8). The ray height is not altered, уз = y,. The
ray-transfer matrix is
R
— 1 0
т \ Ms noR n2
Convex: А > 0; concave: R< 0
Transmission Through a Thin Lens
The relation between 01 and 62 for paraxial rays transmitted through a thin lens of focal
length f is given in (1.2-11). Since the height remains unchanged (y2 = yi), we have
1 0
М = . 1.4-7
] ya]. oan
Convex: f > 0; concave: f <0
Reflection from a Planar Mirror
Upon reflection from a planar mirror, the ray position is not altered, yz = y,;. Adopting
the convention that the z axis points in the general direction of travel of the rays, 1.е.,
toward the mirror for the incident rays and away from it for the reflected rays, we

30 CHAPTER 1 RAY OPTICS
conclude that 05 = 01. The ray-transfer matrix is therefore the identity matrix
05 0
о1° °
Reflection from a Spherical Mirror
Using (1.2-1), and the convention that the z axis follows the general direction of the
rays as they reflect from mirrors, we similarly obtain
10
(-R) M = В | . (1.4-9)
В
Concave: R < 0; convex: К > 0
Note the similarity between the ray-transfer matrices of а spherical mirror (1.4-9) and
a thin lens (1.4-7). A mirror with radius of curvature R bends rays in a manner that is
identical to that of a thin lens with focal length f = —R/2.
C. Matrices of Cascaded Optical Components
A cascade of N optical components or systems whose ray-transfer matrices are
М, М.,... , Мл is equivalent to a single optical system of ray-transfer matrix
(1.4-10)
Note the order of matrix multiplication: The matrix of the system that is crossed by the
rays is first placed to the right, so that it operates on the column matrix of the incident
ray first. A sequence of matrix multiplications is not, in general, commutative, although
it is associative.
НИ
EXERCISE 1.4-2
A Set of Parallel Transparent Plates. Consider a set of N parallel planar transparent plates
of refractive indices п1, п2,..., пм and thicknesses Чт, do,..., dy, placed in air (п, = 1) normal to
the z axis. Using induction, show that the ray-transfer matrix is
1 ny ng ... nn 1
№ а;
- 7 = Е м = Ё dit "|. (4-11)
0 1
9 0 dy
Note that the order in which the plates are placed does not affect the overall ray-transfer matrix. What
is the ray-transfer matrix of an inhomogeneous transparent plate of thickness do and refractive index

1.4 MATRIXOPTICS 31
EXERCISE 1.4-3
A Gap Followed by a Thin Lens. Show that the ray-transfer matrix of a distance d of free
space followed by a lens of focal length f is
f
1 d
M = 3 12a]. (1.4-12)
f f
EXERCISE 1.4-4
Imaging with a Thin Lens. _ Derive an expression for the ray-transfer matrix of a system com-
prised of free space/thin lens/free space, as shown in Fig. 1.4-3. Show that if the imaging condition
(1/а: +1/d2 =1/f) is satisfied, all rays originating from a single point in the input plane reach the
output plane at the single point y2, regardless of their angles. Also show that if dz = f, all parallel
incident rays are focused by the lens onto a single point in the output plane.
f
Figure 1.4-3 Single-lens imaging
system.
= (on —=— d> —|
ee
Imaging with an Arbitrary Paraxial Optical System
A paraxial system comprising an arbitrary set of cascaded optical elements is char-
acterized completely by the four elements A, B, C, D of its ray-transfer matrix M.
Alternatively, the system may be characterized by the locations of four cardinal points:
two focal points that determine the transmission of rays between its input and output
planes. In accordance with (1.4-3), an incoming ray parallel to the optical axis (91 = 0)
at height y; exits the system at height у2 = Ay, and angle 05 = Су. This ray
crosses the axis at a point F' called the back focal point, which is located a distance
y2/02 = A/C from the system’s back vertex У, as shown in Fig. 1.4-4(a). The
intersection of the extensions of the incoming and outgoing rays defines the back
principal point H, which lies at a distance f = 91/05 = —1/C to the left of Г,
and is known as the back focal length. The back principal point Н is thus located at a
distance h = —1/C+A/C to the left of the back vertex У. Note that the locations of the
focal and principal points are independent of y; as long as the paraxial approximation
is applicable.

Similarly, rays parallel to the axis but entering the system in the opposite direction
(from right to left) are focused to the front focal point F’ and define the front prin-
cipal point H’, which lies at a distance h’ from the front vertex У’. The front focal
point lies at a distance f’ to the left of H’, where f” is the front focal length. These
distances may be expressed in terms of the elements of the inverse ray-transfer matrix

/ /
1+ _ |A By 1 р -B
MS = Ё > — ам -ё DA (1.4-13)
via the relations —f’ = —1/C’ and —h’ = —1/C' + A’/C’. The determinant of М,
denoted Че М], is given by AD — BC.

32 CHAPTER 1 RAY OPTICS
In summary, the focal lengths and locations of the principal points may be deter-
mined from the ABCD parameters by use of the following relations:
= -1/С, й = (1-А)} (1.4-14)
f’ = ае М] у, h'=—f'+Df. (1.4-15)
Negative signs indicate directions opposite to those denoted by the arrows in Fig. 1.4-
4(a). The four distances may alternatively be established by tracing two rays, parallel
to the optical axis but pointing in opposite directions, through the system. The ABCD
parameters may be determined from f, f’, h, and h’ by inverting (1.4-14) and (1.4-15).
kK— f§—_ ыы О f—_ ыы
FY И” УЕ ри И. ОИ ОО В
(а) (b)
Figure 1.4-4 (a) Paraxial system representing an arbitrary set of cascaded optical elements. The
designations F’, V, and H represent the focal, vertex, and principal points, respectively, whereas f and
h represent the focal length and distance from the principal point to the vertex, respectively. Primed
quantities refer to the input plane while unprimed quantities refer to the output plane. (b) Imaging
with this system. The refractive indices of the media in which the optical system is embedded are
denoted пл and nz, as shown.

The imaging condition is determined by considering the geometry portrayed in
Fig. 1.4-4(b). Since 52/} = f’/s;, the imaging condition is simply $152 = ff’, or
equivalently (21 — f’)(z2 — f) = ff’, which leads to

/
£ + f = 1. (1.4-16)
= 22
If the refractive indices of the media within which the system is embedded are equal,
then 4е [М] = 1 and, in accordance with (1.4-15), we have f’ = f. The imaging
condition in (1.4-16) then reduces to the familiar imaging equation 1/21 + 1/22 = 1/f
[see (1.2-4)]; note, however, that here the distances 21 and 22 are measured from the
principal points H’ and H, respectively.
ee
EXERCISE 1.4-5
Imaging with a Thick Lens. _ Consider a glass lens of refractive index п, thickness d, and two
spherical surfaces of equal radii R. Determine the ray-transfer matrix of the lens assuming that it is
placed in air (unity refractive index). Show that the back and front focal lengths are equal (f’ = })
and that the principal points are located at equal distances from the vertices (h’ = h), where
1 (n-1) n—-ld
= = ~—_— _|2—- —— — 1.4-17
77a ba oer
(n 1) fd
pa a 1.4-18
77) ( )
Demonstrate that the transfer matrix of the system between two conjugate planes at distances 21 and
22 from the principal points of the lens (i.e., at distances dy = z, — h’ and 42 = 22 — h from the
vertices) that satisfies the imaging equation yields В = 0, indicating that it does indeed satisfy the
imaging condition [see Exercise 1.4-1(b)].
ee

1.4 MATRIXOPTICS 33
D. Periodic Optical Systems
A periodic optical system is a cascade of identical unit systems. An example is a
sequence of equally spaced identical relay lenses used to guide light, as shown in
Fig. 1.2-19(a). Another example is the reflection of light between two mirrors that
form an optical resonator (see Sec. 11.2A); in that case, the ray repeatedly traverses
the same unit system (a round trip of reflections). Even a homogeneous medium, such
as a glass fiber, may be considered as a periodic system if it is divided into contiguous
identical segments of equal length. We proceed to formulate a general theory of ray
propagation in periodic optical systems using matrix methods.
Difference Equation for the Ray Position
A periodic system is composed of a cascade of identical unit systems (stages), each
with a ray-transfer matrix (A, B, C, D), as shown in Fig. 1.4-5. A ray enters the system
with initial position yo and slope бу. To determine the position and slope (Ym, 4m) of
the ray at the exit of the mth stage, we apply the ABCD matrix m times,
ym| _ [A В” №
A - Е 5 ae | (14-19)
We can also iteratively apply the relations
Om+1 = Сут + DOm (1.4-21)
to determine (yi, 61) from (yo, 00), then (y2, 02) from (ул, 01), and so on, using a
software routine.
Yo} A BI] АВ ... А В А В || А В | Уж-!
% | ¢ D fe, | со ср св |cole.,
1 2 т-1 т т-1
Figure 1.4-5 A cascade of identical optical systems.

It is of interest to derive equations that govern the dynamics of the position ут,
т = 0,1,..., irrespective of the angle @,,. This is achieved by eliminating 9» from
(1.4-20) and (1.4-21). From (1.4-20)

—A
Om = Ym Ито (1.4-22)
B
Replacing m with m + 1 in (1.4-22) yields
—A
бт = Ут T ret 1 (1.4-23)
B
Substituting (1.4-22) and (1.4-23) into (1.4-21) gives
Yn42 = бут — F? ym, (1.4-24)
Recurrence Relation
for Ray Position

34  CHAPTER1 RAY OPTICS
where ALD
path (1.4-25)
2
Е? = AD — ВС = ае М], (1.4-26)
and ае [М] is the determinant of М.

Equation (1.4-24) is a linear difference equation governing the ray position ym. It
can be solved iteratively by computing yz from yo and ут, then уз from y; and yo, and
so on. The quantity у: may be computed from yo and 6% by use of (1.4-20) with m = 0.

It is useful, however, to derive an explicit expression for y,, by solving the difference
equation (1.4-24). As with linear differential equations, a solution satisfying a linear
difference equation and the initial conditions is a unique solution. It is therefore appro-
priate to make a judicious guess for the solution of (1.4-24). We use a trial solution of
the geometric form

Ym = Yoh", (1.4-27)
where h is a constant. Substituting (1.4-27) into (1.4-24) immediately shows that the
trial solution is suitable provided that h satisfies the quadratic algebraic equation

h? — 2bh + Е? = 0, (1.4-28)
from which
h=b+jvV Е? — В. (1.4-29)
The results can be presented in a more compact form by defining the variable
ф =cos '(b/F), (1.4-30)
so that b = Рсозф, VF? — b? = Fsiny, and therefore № = F(cosp + jsiny) =
F exp(+jy), whereupon (1.4-27) becomes уж = у Е” exp(+jmy).

A general solution may be constructed from the two solutions with positive and
negative signs by forming their linear combination. The sum of the two exponential
functions can always be written as a harmonic (circular) function, so that

Ym = УтахЁ" эт (пр + Yo); (1.4-31)
where ушах and yo are constants to be determined from the initial conditions yo and
д. In particular, setting m = 0 we obtain ymax = Yo/ SiN Yo.

The parameter F' is related to the determinant of the ray-transfer matrix of the unit
system by Р = \/ае М]. It can be shown that regardless of the unit system, det|M] =
ти /п2, where пл and п2 are the refractive indices of the initial and final sections
of the unit system. This general result is easily verified for the ray-transfer matrices
of all the optical components considered in this section. Since the determinant of a
product of two matrices is the product of their determinants, it follows that the relation
ае [М] = пл /п2 is applicable to any cascade of these optical components. For exam-
ple, if det{M,] = n1/ne and 4е [М5] = n2/nsz, then det[M2My] = (n2/ng)(ni/n2) =
n,/n3. In most applications the first and last stages are air (п = 1) so that ny = no,
which leads to det|M] = 1 and Р = 1. In that case the solution for the ray position is

Ут = Ymax Sin(my + Yo). (1.4-32)
Ray Position
Periodic System

1.4 MATRIXOPTICS 35
We shall henceforth assume that fF’ = 1. The corresponding solution for the ray angle
is obtained by use of the relation 0. = (Y%m+41— AYm)/B, which is derived from
(1.4-20).
Condition for а Harmonic Trajectory
For Ym to be a harmonic (instead of hyperbolic) function, ф = cos! b must be real.
This requires that
<1 %х ПАО <1. (1.4-33)
Stability Condition
If, instead, |b| > 1, y is then imaginary and the solution is a hyperbolic function (cosh
ог sinh), which increases without bound, as illustrated in Fig. 1.4-6(а). A harmonic
solution ensures that ут is bounded for all т, with a maximum value of ушах. The
bound |b| < 1 therefore provides a condition of stability (boundedness) of the ray
trajectory.

Since ут and Ym+1 are both harmonic functions, so too is the ray angle corre-
sponding to (1.4-32), by virtue of (1.4-22) and trigonometric identities. Thus, 9и =
Omax Sin(myp + ф1), where the constants Onax and ф1 are determined by the initial
conditions. The maximum angle дах must be sufficiently small so that the paraxial
approximation, which underlies this analysis, is applicable.

» ВИННИ
LET TLE ET TREE EET EER”
Ym Г. Г.
» А АГАТ
LEM ULM ПРИМИ М "
Ут 7
о ALA ALTA UA TY
LENA LES TT EEL”
rLiL PELE Ы
Figure 1.4-6 Examples of trajectories in periodic optical systems: (a) unstable trajectory (b >
1); ($) stable and periodic trajectory (р = 67/11; period = 11 stages); (с) stable but nonperiodic
trajectory (ф = 1.5).
Condition for a Periodic Trajectory
The harmonic function (1.4-32) is periodic in m if it is possible to find an integer s such
that Ym+is = Ym for all т. The smallest integer is the period. The ray then retraces its
path after s stages. This condition is satisfied if sp = 27q, where 4 is an integer.
Thus, the necessary and sufficient condition for a periodic trajectory is that ф/2т is a
rational number q/s. Ёф = 67/11, for example, then y/27 = 3/11 and the trajectory
is periodic with period s = 11 stages. This case is illustrated in Fig. 1.4-6(6). Periodic
optical systems will be revisited in Chapter 7.

36 CHAPTER 1 RAY OPTICS
Summary
A paraxial ray (Omax < 1) traveling through a cascade of identical unit optical
systems, each with a ray-transfer matrix with elements (A,B,C, D) such that
AD — BC = 1, follows a harmonic (and therefore bounded) trajectory if the
condition |4(A + D)| < 1, called the stability condition, is satisfied. The position
at the mth stage is then ут = YmaxSin(my + Фо), т = 0,1,2,..., where
ф = cos! [3 (A+ D)]. The constants ymax and фо are determined from the initial
positions yo and у1 = Ayo + BOo, where бу is the initial ray inclination. The
ray angles are related to the positions by 0, = (Ym+1 — AYm)/B and follow а
harmonic function 0,, = Omax sin(myp + 1). The ray trajectory is periodic with
period $ if y/27 is a rational number q/s.
EXAMPLE 1.4-1. A Sequence of Equally Spaced Identical Lenses. —А set of identical
lenses of focal length } separated by distance d, as shown in Fig. 1.4-7, may be used to relay light
between two locations. The unit system, a distance of d of free space followed by a lens, has a
ray-transfer matrix given by (1.4-12); А = 1, В = d, С = —1/f, D = 1 — d/f. The parameter
b = 3(A+ D) = 1 -d/2f and the determinant is unity. The condition for a stable ray trajectory,
[6] < lor —1 < 6 < 1, is therefore
0<d<4f, (1.4-34)
so that the spacing between the lenses must be smaller than four times the focal length. Under this
condition the positions of paraxial rays obey the harmonic function
. —1 а
Ym = Утах Sin(my + Фо), ф = cos 1- af . (1.4-35)
Л ЛИ fh
т Figure 1.4-7 А periodic sequence of
р | lenses.
J gg gy
When d = 2f, р = 1/2, and ф/2п = 1/4, so that the trajectory of an arbitrary ray is periodic with
period equal to four stages. When d = f, ф = 1/3, and ф/2п = 1/6, so that the ray trajectory is
periodic and retraces itself each six stages. These cases are illustrated in Fig. 1.4-8.
—-
—>
-а—
l<—d—>|
Figure 1.4-8 Examples of stable ray trajectories in a periodic lens system: (a) 4 = 2}; (6) а = f.
«И

READING LIST 37
ee
EXERCISE 1.4-6
A Periodic Set of Pairs of Different Lenses. Examine the trajectories of paraxial rays
through a periodic system comprising a sequence of lens pairs with alternating focal lengths f; and
}2, as shown in Fig. 1.4-9. Show that the ray trajectory is bounded (stable) if

d d
0<{1-—=~]{(1-=—]) <1. (1.4-36)
( 2f :) ( 2 :)
PO pay
|
| | | |
| I | |
В IL и |
Figure 1.4-9 A periodic sequence of lens pairs.
EXERCISE 1.4-7
An Optical Resonator. _ Paraxial rays are reflected repeatedly between two spherical mirrors of
radii R, and Rz separated by a distance d (Fig. 1.4-10). Regarding this as a periodic system whose
unit system is a single round trip between the mirrors, determine the condition of stability for the ray
trajectory. Optical resonators will be studied in detail in Chapter 11.
и Ry NR SN
и че й
м — | Figure 1.4-10 The optical resonator аз a
й | Ve periodic optical system.
О ЁЁЙЁЙ
READING LIST
General Optics
Е. Г. Pedrotti, L. М. Pedrotti, and L. $. Pedrotti, Introduction to Optics, Cambridge University Press,
3rd ed. 2018.
T.-C. Poon and T. Kim, Engineering Optics with MATLAB, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2018.
E. Hecht, Optics, Pearson, Sth ed. 2016.
S. D. Gupta, N. Ghosh, and A. Banerjee, Wave Optics: Basic Concepts and Contemporary Trends,
CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2016.
B. D. Guenther, Modern Optics, Oxford University Press, 2nd ed. 2015.
C. A. DiMarzio, Optics for Engineers, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2011.

38 CHAPTER 1 RAY OPTICS

M. Mansuripur, Classical Optics and Its Applications, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2009.

A. Walther, The Ray and Wave Theory of Lenses, Cambridge University Press, 1995, paperback ed.
2006.

A. Siciliano, Optics: Problems and Solutions, World Scientific, 2006.

M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University Press, 7th expanded and corrected
ed. 2002.

D. T. Moore, ed., Selected Papers on Gradient-Index Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Mile-
stone Series Volume 67), 1993.

Е А. Jenkins and Н. Е. White, Fundamentals of Optics, McGraw-Hill, 1937, 4th revised ed. 1991.

R. W. Wood, Physical Optics, Macmillan, 3rd ed. 1934; Optical Society of America, 1988.

A. Sommerfeld, Lectures on Theoretical Physics: Optics, Academic Press, paperback ed. 1954.

Geometrical Optics

P. D. Lin, Advanced Geometrical Optics, Springer-Verlag, 2017.

У. М. Mahajan, Fundamentals of Geometrical Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2014.

E. Dereniak and T. D. Dereniak, Geometrical and Trigonometric Optics, Cambridge University Press,
2008.

Yu. A. Kravtsov, Geometrical Optics in Engineering Physics, Alpha Science, 2005.

J. E. Greivenkamp, Field Guide to Geometrical Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2004.

P. Mouroulis and J. Macdonald, Geometrical Optics and Optical Design, Oxford University Press,
1997.

Optical System Design

р. Malacara-Hernandez and Z. Malacara-Hernandez, Handbook of Optical Design, CRC Press/Taylor
& Francis, 3rd ed. 2013.

J. Sasian, Introduction to Aberrations in Optical Imaging Systems, Cambridge University Press, 2013.

K. J. Kasunic, Optical Systems Engineering, McGraw-Hill, 2011.

R. E. Fischer, B. Tadic-Galeb, and P. R. Yoder, Optical System Design, McGraw-Hill, 2nd ed. 2008.

W. J. Smith, Modern Optical Engineering, McGraw-Hill, 1966, 4th ed. 2008.

D. C. O’Shea, Elements of Modern Optical Design, Wiley, 1985.

Matrix Optics

A. Gerrard and J. M. Burch, Introduction to Matrix Methods in Optics, Wiley, 1975; Dover, reprinted
2012.

J. W. Blaker, Geometric Optics: The Matrix Theory, CRC Press, 1971.

Popular and Historical

R. J. Weiss, A Brief History of Light and Those that Lit the Way, World Scientific, 1996.

А. В. Hall, АЙ was Light: An Introduction to Newton’s Opticks, Clarendon Press/Oxford University
Press, 1993.

R. Kingslake, A History of the Photographic Lens, Academic Press, 1989.

M. I. Sobel, Light, University of Chicago Press, 1987.

А. 1. Sabra, Theories of Light from Descartes to Newton, Cambridge University Press, 1981.

V. Ronchi, The Nature of Light: An Historical Survey, Harvard University Press, 1970.

W. H. Bragg, Universe of Light, Dover, paperback ed. 1959.

I. Newton, Opticks: or A Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections & Colours of Light, 4th
ed. 1704; Dover, reissued 1979.

PROBLEMS
1.1-2 Fermat’s Principle with Maximum Time. Consider the elliptical mirror shown in Fig. P1.1-
2(a), whose foci are denoted A and B. Geometrical properties of the ellipse dictate that the

PROBLEMS 39
pathlength АРВ is identical to the pathlengths AP’B and АР” В for adjacent points on the
ellipse.

(a) Now consider another mirror with a radius of curvature smaller than that of the elliptical
mirror, but tangent to it at P, as displayed in Fig. P1.1-2(b). Show that the path APB
followed by the light ray in traveling between points A and B is a path of maximum time,
i.e., is greater than the adjacent paths AQ’B and AQ” В.

(b) Finally, consider a mirror that crosses the ellipse, but is tangent to it at P, as illustrated
in Fig. P1.1-2(c). Show that the possible ray paths AQ’B, APB, and AQ” B exhibit a
point of inflection.

р’ P Pp" P О” О Р О"
(а) (b) (с)

Figure P1.1-2 (а) Reflection from an elliptical mirror. (5) Reflection from an inscribed

tangential mirror with greater curvature. (c) Reflection from a tangential mirror with

curvature changing from concave to convex.
1.2-7 Transmission through Planar Plates.

(a) Use Snell’s law to show that a ray entering a planar plate of thickness d and refractive
index пл (placed in air; п = 1) emerges parallel to its initial direction. The ray need not
be paraxial. Derive an expression for the lateral displacement of the ray as a function of
the angle of incidence 0. Explain your results in terms of Fermat’s principle.

(b) If the plate instead comprises a stack of № parallel layers stacked against each other
with thicknesses 41, 45,...,Ам and refractive indices пл, п2,...,Пм, Show that the
transmitted ray is parallel to the incident ray. If 6,, is the angle of the ray in the mth
layer, show that n,, sin 0, = зщ 9, т =1,2,....

1.2-8 Lens in Water. Determine the focal length f of a biconvex lens with radii 20 cm and 30 cm
and refractive index n = 1.5. What is the focal length when the lens is immersed in water

(n = 4/3)?

1.2-9 Numerical Aperture of a Cladless Fiber. Determine the numerical aperture and the accep-
tance angle of an optical fiber if the refractive index of the core isn, = 1.46 and the cladding

is stripped out (replaced with air ng А 1).

1.2-10 Fiber Coupling Spheres. Tiny glass balls are often used as lenses to couple light into and
out of optical fibers. The fiber end is located at a distance f from the sphere. For a sphere of
radius а = 1 mm and refractive index п, = 1.8, determine f such that a ray parallel to the
optical axis at a distance y = 0.7 mm is focused onto the fiber, as illustrated in Fig. P1.2-10.

nea
\ —
Lens Fiber
Figure P1.2-10 Focusing light into an optical fiber with a spherical glass ball.

1.2-11 Extraction of Light from a High-Refractive-Index Medium. Assume that light is gener-
ated isotropically in all directions inside a material of refractive index n = 3.7 cut in the
shape of a parallelepiped and placed in air (n = 1) (see Exercise 1.2-6).

(a) If a reflective material acting as a perfect mirror is coated on all sides except the front

40 CHAPTER 1 RAY OPTICS
side, determine the percentage of light that may be extracted from the front side.
(b) If another transparent material of refractive index n = 1.4 is placed on the front side,
would that help extract some of the trapped light?

1.3-3 Axially Graded Plate. A plate of thickness d is oriented normal to the z axis. The refractive
index n(z) is graded in the z direction. Show that a ray entering the plate from air at an
incidence angle 9 in the y—z plane makes an angle 0(z) at position = in the medium given
by n(z) sin 0(z) = sin 09. Show that the ray emerges into air parallel to the original incident
ray. Hint: You may use the results of Prob. 1.2-7. Show that the ray position y(z) inside the
plate obeys the differential equation (dy/dz)? = (n?/sin? 0 —1)-!.

1.3-4 Ray Trajectories in GRIN Fibers. Consider a graded-index optical fiber with cylindrical
symmetry about the = axis and refractive index n(p), р = \/x? + y?. Let (p,¢, z) be the
position vector in a cylindrical coordinate system. Rewrite the paraxial ray equations, (1.3-
4), in a cylindrical system and derive differential equations for р and Ф as functions of z.

1.4-8 Ray-Transfer Matrix of a Lens System. Determine the ray-transfer matrix for an optical
system made of a thin convex lens of focal length f and a thin concave lens of focal length
— } separated by a distance f. Discuss the imaging properties of this composite lens.

1.4-9 Ray-Transfer Matrix of a GRIN Plate. Determine the ray-transfer matrix of a SELFOC plate
[.е., a graded-index material with parabolic refractive index n(y) = no(1 — 192?) of
thickness 4.

1.4-10 The GRIN Plate as a Periodic System. Consider the trajectories of paraxial rays inside
a SELFOC plate normal to the z axis. This system may be regarded as a periodic system
comprising a sequence of identical contiguous plates, each of thickness d. Using the result of
Prob. 1.4-9, determine the stability condition of the ray trajectory. Is this condition dependent
on the choice of d?

1.4-11 Recurrence Relation for a Planar-Mirror Resonator. Consider a planar-mirror optical
resonator, with mirror separation d, as a periodic optical system. Determine the unit ray-
transfer matrix for this system, demonstrating that b = 1 and Р = 1. Show that there is then
only a single root to the quadratic equation (1.4-28) so that the ray position must then take
the form a + т, where a and В are constants.

1.4-12 4 x 4 Ray-Transfer Matrix for Skewed Rays. Matrix methods may be generalized to
describe skewed paraxial rays in circularly symmetric systems, and to astigmatic (non-
circularly symmetric) systems. A ray crossing the plane z = 0 is generally characterized by
four variables — the coordinates (x,y) of its position in the plane, and the angles (0,, 6,)
that its projections in the 1—2 and y—z planes make with the z axis. The emerging ray is
also characterized by four variables that are linearly related to the initial four variables. The
optical system may then be characterized completely, within the paraxial approximation, by
a4 x 4 matrix.

xX
(a) Determine the 4 x 4 ray-transfer matrix of a distance d in free
space.
(b) Determine the 4 x 4 ray-transfer matrix of a thin cylindrical lens
with focal length f oriented in the y direction. The cylindrical lens
has focal length f for rays in the y—z plane, and no focusing power
for rays in the x—z plane. Zz
y

CHAPTER
eee
2.1 POSTULATES OF WAVE OPTICS 43
2.2 MONOCHROMATIC WAVES 44

A. Complex Representation and the Helmholtz Equation
B. Elementary Waves
С. Paraxial Waves
*2.3 RELATION BETWEEN WAVE OPTICS AND RAY OPTICS 52
2.4 SIMPLE OPTICAL COMPONENTS 53
A. Reflection and Refraction
B. Transmission Through Optical Components
С. Graded-Index Optical Components
2.5 INTERFERENCE 61
A. Interference of Two Waves
В. Multiple-Wave Interference
2.6 POLYCHROMATIC AND PULSED LIGHT 71
A. Temporal and Spectral Description
B. Light Beating
_ = Va
Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695) advanced Thomas Young (1773-1829) championed the
a number of novel concepts pertaining to the wave theory of light and discovered the princi-
propagation of light waves. ple of optical interference.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
41

CSC
Light propagates in the form of waves. In free space, light waves travel with a constant
speed, c, = 3.0 x 108 m/s (30 cm/ns or 0.3 mm/ps or 0.3 jum/fs or 0.3 nm/as). As
illustrated in Fig. 2.0-1, the range of optical wavelengths comprises three principal
sub-regions: infrared (0.760 to 300 jum), visible (390 to 760 nm), and ultraviolet (10 to
390 nm). The corresponding range of optical frequencies stretches from 1 THz in the
far-infrared to 30 PHz in the extreme ultraviolet.
8 >> > 8
Frequency
N N м
а .2 Е
Е = 5 =
Г Ив!
Е Е Е
Wavelength Е Е =
(in vacuum)
Е 7 5 6 |e] $
a Я БЕ a 2 g
= 8 < 5 о + + са
Figure 2.0-1 Optical frequencies and wavelengths. The infrared (IR) region of the spectrum
comprises the near-infrared (NIR), mid-infrared (MIR), and far-infrared (FIR) bands. The MWIR
and LWIR bands both lie within the MIR band; radiation in these regions can penetrate the
atmosphere. The ultraviolet (UV) region comprises the near-ultraviolet (NUV), mid-ultraviolet
(MUV) or deep-ultraviolet (DUV), far-ultraviolet (FUV), and extreme-ultraviolet (EUV or XUV)
bands. The vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) consists of the FUV and EUV bands. The ultraviolet region is
also divided into the UVA, UVB, and UVC bands, which have chemical and biological significance.
The infrared, visible, and ultraviolet regions are gathered under the rubric “optical” since they make
use of similar types of components (e.g., lenses and mirrors). The terahertz (THz) region occupies
frequencies that stretch from 0.3 to 3 THz, corresponding to wavelengths that extend from 1 mm to
100 zm; the THz region partially overlaps the FIR band. For X-ray wavelengths, see Fig. 16.3-7.
The wave theory of light encompasses the ray theory (Fig. 2.0-2). Strictly speaking,
ray optics is the limit of wave optics when the wavelength is infinitesimally short.
However, the wavelength need not actually be zero for the ray-optics theory to be
useful. As long as the light waves propagate through and around objects whose dimen-
sions are much greater than the wavelength, the ray theory suffices for describing most
optical phenomena. Because the wavelength of visible light is much smaller than the
dimensions of the usual objects we encounter on a daily basis, the manifestations of
the wave nature of light are usually not apparent without careful observation.
Wave Optics
. Figure 2.0-2 Wave optics encompasses ray
Ray Optics optics. Ray optics is the limit of wave optics when
the wavelength is very short.
42

2.1 POSTULATES OF WAVE OPTICS 43
This Chapter
In the context of wave optics, light is described by a scalar function, called the wave-
function, that obeys a second-order differential equation known as the wave equation.
A discussion of the physical significance of the wavefunction is deferred to Chap-
ter 5, where we consider electromagnetic optics; it will become apparent there that
the wavefunction represents any of the components of the electric or magnetic fields.
The wave equation, together with a relation between the optical power density and
the wavefunction, constitute the postulates of the scalar-wave model of light known
as wave optics. The consequences of these simple postulates are manifold and far
reaching. Wave optics constitutes a basis for describing a host of optical phenomena
that fall outside the confines of ray optics, including interference and diffraction, as
will become clear in this and the following two chapters (Chapters 3 and 4).

Wave optics does have its limitations, however. It is not capable of providing a
complete picture of the reflection and refraction of light at the boundaries between
various media, nor can it accommodate optical phenomena that require a vector formu-
lation, such as polarization effects. Those issues will be considered from a fundamental
perspective in Chapters 5-8, as will the conditions under which scalar wave optics
provides a good approximation to electromagnetic optics.

The chapter begins with the postulates of wave optics (Sec. 2.1). In Secs. 2.2—2.5
we consider monochromatic waves. Elementary waves, such as the plane wave, the
spherical wave, and paraxial waves are introduced in Sec. 2.2. Section 2.3 establishes
how ray optics is formally derived from wave optics. The interaction of optical waves
with simple optical components such as mirrors, prisms, lenses, and various graded-
index elements is examined in Sec. 2.4. Interference, an important manifestation of
the wave nature of light, is the subject of Secs. 2.5 and 2.6, where polychromatic and
pulsed light are discussed.

2.1 POSTULATES OF WAVE OPTICS
The Wave Equation
Light propagates in the form of waves. In free space, light waves travel with speed c,. A
homogeneous transparent medium such as glass is characterized by a single constant,
its refractive index n (> 1). In a medium of refractive index п, light waves travel with
а reduced speed
c= 2. (2.1-1)
n Speed of Light
in a Medium
An optical wave is described mathematically by a real function of position r = (2, y, z)
and time $, denoted u(r, $) and known as the wavefunction. It satisfies a partial differ-
ential equation called the wave equation,
2
Vu 42 0, (2.1-2)
с Ot Wave Equation
where V? is the Laplacian operator, which is У? = 02/02? + 0?/dy? + 92/022 in
Cartesian coordinates. Any function that satisfies (2.1-2) represents a possible optical
wave.

44  CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS

Because the wave equation is linear, the principle of superposition applies: if
и (г, $) and и2 (г, t) represent possible optical waves, then u(r,t) = ил (г, В) + и2(г, 1)
also represents a possible optical wave.

At the boundary between two different media, the wavefunction changes in a way
that depends on their refractive indices. However, the laws that govern this change
depend on the physical significance assigned to the wavefunction which, as will be
seen in Chapter 5, is an electromagnetic-field component. The underlying physical
origin of the refractive index derives from electromagnetic optics (Sec. 5.5B).

The wave equation is also approximately applicable for media with refractive in-
dices that are position dependent, provided that the variation is slow within distances
of the order of a wavelength. The medium is then said to be locally homogeneous.
For such media, n in (2.1-1) and сш (2.1-2) are simply replaced by the appropriate
position-dependent functions n(r) and c(r), respectively.

Intensity, Power, and Energy
The optical intensity (r,t), defined as the optical power per unit area (units of
watts / cm’), is proportional to the average of the squared wavefunction:

I(r, t) = 2(u?(r,t)). (2.1-3)

Optical Intensity

The operation (-) denotes averaging over a time interval much longer than the time of
an optical cycle, but much shorter than any other time of interest (such as the duration
of a pulse of light). The duration of an optical cycle is very short: 2 x 10-'s = 2 fs
for light of wavelength 600 nm, as an example. This concept is further elucidated in
Sec. 2.6. The quantity Г(г, $) is sometimes also called the irradiance.

Although the physical significance of the wavefunction u(r, #) has not been explic-
itly specified, (2.1-3) represents its connection with a physically measurable quantity
— the optical intensity. There is some arbitrariness in the definition of the wavefunction
and its relation to the intensity. For example, (2.1-3) could have been written without
the factor 2 and the wavefunction scaled by a factor V2, in which case the intensity
would remain the same. The choice of the factor 2 in (2.1-3) will later prove convenient,
however.

The optical power P(t) (units of watts) flowing into an area A normal to the direc-
tion of propagation of light is the integrated intensity

P(t) = ] I(r,t)dA. (2.1-4)
A
The optical energy Е (units of joules) collected in a given time interval is the integral
of the optical power over the time interval.
2.2 MONOCHROMATIC WAVES
A monochromatic wave is represented by a wavefunction with harmonic time depen-
dence,
u(r, Е) = a(r) cos[2rvt + y(r)], (2.2-1)

2.2 MONOCHROMATIC WAVES 45
as illustrated in Fig. 2.2-1(a), where
a(r) = amplitude
ф(г) = phase
и = frequency (cycles/s or Hz)
w = 2пи = angular frequency (radians/s or s~')
Т =1/v = 2” /№ = period ($).
Both the amplitude and phase are generally position dependent, but the wavefunction
is a harmonic function of time with frequency и at all positions. Optical waves have
frequencies that lie in the range 3 x 10" to 3 x 1016 Hz, as depicted in Fig. 2.0-1.
ud) Im{U} Im{U}
И Т= Ми 7 А
a ф i “\¥ `
о ; Re{U} т Е Re{U}
(a) (b) (с)
Figure 2.2-1 Representations of a monochromatic wave at a fixed position г: (a) the wavefunction
u(t) is a harmonic function of time; (5) the complex amplitude U = aexp(jy) is a fixed phasor;
(©) the complex wavefunction U(t) = U exp(j27vt) is a phasor rotating with angular velocity w =
2пи radians/s.
A. Complex Representation and the Helmholtz Equation
Complex Wavefunction
It is convenient to represent the real wavefunction u(r,t) in (2.2-1) in terms of a
complex function
U(r, t) = a(r) expljy(r)| exp2nvt) , (2.2-2)
so that
u(r, t) = Re{U(r, t)} = 4[U(r, t) + U*(r, 5], (2.2-3)
where the symbol * signifies complex conjugation. The function U(r, #), known as the
complex wavefunction, describes the wave completely; the wavefunction u(r, #) is
simply its real part. Like the wavefunction u(r, $), the complex wavefunction U(r, $)
must also satisfy the wave equation
1 020
УИ =0. (2.2-4)
с? Ot?
Wave Equation
The two functions satisfy the same boundary conditions.

46 — СНАРТЕВ2 WAVE OPTICS
Complex Amplitude
Equation (2.2-2) may be written in the form
U(r, t) = U(r) exp(j27t) , (2.2-5)
where the time-independent factor U(r) = a(r) exp[jy(r)] is referred to as the com-
plex amplitude of the wave. The wavefunction u(r, t) is therefore related to the com-
plex amplitude by
u(r, t) = Re{U(r) exp(j2nvt)} = $[U(r) exp(j2mvt) + U*(r) exp(—j2mvt)] .
(2.2-6)
At a given position r, the complex amplitude U(r) is a complex variable [depicted
in Fig. 2.2-1(b)] whose magnitude |U(r)| = a(r) is the amplitude of the wave and
whose argument arg{U(r)} = y(r) is the phase. The complex wavefunction U(r, $),
shown in Fig. 2.2-1(c), is represented graphically by a phasor that rotates with angular
velocity w = 2пи radians/s. Its initial value at $ = 0 is the complex amplitude U(r).
The Helmholtz Equation
Substituting U(r,t) = U(r) exp(j2mvt) from (2.2-5) into the wave equation (2.2-4)
leads to a differential equation for the complex amplitude U(r):
V7U +k°U =0, (2.2-7)
Helmholtz Equation
which is known as the Helmholtz equation, where
2
оо (2.2-8)
с с Wavenumber
is referred to as the wavenumber. Different solutions are obtained from different
boundary conditions.
Optical Intensity
The optical intensity is determined by inserting (2.2-1) into (2.1-3):
2u?(r,t) = 2a?(r) cos? [2rvt + y(r)]
= |U(r)|? {1 + cos (2 [27vt + y(r)])}. (2.2-9)
Averaging (2.2-9) over a time longer than an optical period, 1/v, causes the second
term of (2.2-9) to vanish, whereupon
I(r) = |U(r)/?. (2.2-10)
Optical Intensity
The optical intensity of a monochromatic wave is the absolute square of its
complex amplitude.
The intensity of a monochromatic wave does not vary with time.

2.2 MONOCHROMATIC WAVES 47
Wavefronts
The wavefronts are the surfaces of equal phase, y(r) = constant. The constants are
often taken to be multiples of 27 so that y(r) = 27q, where 4 is an integer. The
wavefront normal at position г is parallel to the gradient vector Vy(r) (a vector that
has components 0y/0x, дф/ду, and Oy/Oz in a Cartesian coordinate system). It
represents the direction at which the rate of change of the phase is maximum.
Summary
= A monochromatic wave of frequency v is described by a complex wavefunction
U(r, t) = U(r) exp(j2mvt), which satisfies the wave equation.

= The complex amplitude U(r) satisfies the Helmholtz equation; its magnitude
|U(r)| and argument arg{U(r)} are the amplitude and phase of the wave,
respectively. The optical intensity is I(r) = |U(r)|?. The wavefronts are the
surfaces of constant phase, y(r) = arg{U(r)} = 27q (4 = integer).

= The wavefunction u(r, t) is the real part of the complex wavefunction, u(r, $) =

Re{U(r, t)}. The wavefunction also satisfies the wave equation.

B. Elementary Waves
The simplest solutions of the Helmholtz equation in a homogeneous medium are the
plane wave and the spherical wave.
The Plane Wave
The plane wave has complex amplitude

U(r) = Aexp(—jk-r) = Aexp[—j(k,u + Ку + kzz)] , (2.2-11)
where A is acomplex constant called the complex envelope that represents the strength
of the wave, and К = (k,, ky, kz) is called the wavevector.’ Substituting (2.2-11) into
the Helmholtz equation (2.2-7) yields the relation k? + К + 2 = k?, so that the
magnitude of the wavevector К is the wavenumber К.

Since the phase of the wave is arg{U(r)} = arg{ A} —k-r, the surfaces of constant
phase (wavefronts) obey k-r = k,u+kyy+k.z = 20q+arg{A} with 4 integer. This
is the equation describing parallel planes perpendicular to the wavevector k (hence the
name “plane wave’’). Consecutive planes are separated by a distance А = 2л /К, so that

с
А=-, (2.2-12)
и Wavelength
where Л is called the wavelength. The plane wave has a constant intensity I(r) = | A|?
everywhere in space so that it carries infinite power. This wave is clearly an idealization
since it exists everywhere and at all times.

* The complex wavefunction for a monochromatic plane wave is written in a form commonly used in electrical
engineering: U(r,t) = A exp[j(wt — К - r)]. In the physics literature, this same wave is usually written as
U(r, t) = A exp[—i(wt—k-r)]; correspondence is attained by simply replacing i with —j, where i = 7 = /—1.
This choice has no bearing on the final result, as is evidenced by observing that the wavefunction u(r, Е) in (2.2-
13) takes the form of a cosine function, for which cos(a) = cos(—2).

48 CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
If the z axis is taken along the direction of the wavevector k, then U(r) =
Aexp(—jkz) and the corresponding wavefunction obtained from (2.2-6) is
u(r, t) = |A| cos [2rvt — kz + arg{A}| = |A| cos [27v(t — z/c) + arg{A}] .
(2.2-13)
The wavefunction is therefore periodic in time with period 1/v, and periodic in space
with period 27/k, which is equal to the wavelength (see Fig. 2.2-2). Since the phase
of the complex wavefunction, arg{U(r, t)} = 2av(t — z/c) + arg{A}, varies with
time and position as a function of the variable t — z/c (see Fig. 2.2-2), c is called the
phase velocity of the wave.
x —>| A [= и(х, Z, ty)
U(x, Z, 1)
—>| 1/v |j<—
5
х и(х, 5, 15) f
z
Figure 2.2-2 The wavefunction of a plane wave traveling in the z direction, schematically drawn
as a graded red pattern, is a periodic function of z with spatial period Л, and a periodic function of
t with temporal period 1/v. The surfaces of constant phase (wavefronts) comprise a parallel set of
planes normal to the z axis. The wavelengths displayed in Fig. 2.0-1 are in free space (A = X,).

In a medium of refractive index п, the wave has phase velocity с = c,/n and
wavelength A = с/и = c,/nv, so that А = Ль/п where A, = со/и is the wavelength
in free space. Thus, for a given frequency v, the wavelength in the medium is reduced
relative to that in free space by the factor n. As a consequence, the wavenumber
К = 27/X is increased relative to that in free space (ky = 27/A,) by the factor п.

As a monochromatic wave propagates through media of different refractive in-

dices its frequency remains the same, but its velocity, wavelength, and wavenum-

ber are altered:
С А
n n
The Spherical Wave
Another simple solution of the Helmholtz equation (in spherical coordinates) is the
spherical wave complex amplitude
A
U(r) = — exp(—jkr), (2.2-15)
r
where r is the distance from the origin, К = 27v/c = w/c is the wavenumber, and
Ao is a constant. The intensity J(r) = |Ao|?/r? is inversely proportional to the square
of the distance. Taking arg{Ao} = 0 for simplicity, the wavefronts are the surfaces
kr = 2” д or r = qd, where 4 is an integer. These are concentric spheres separated by
a radial distance \ = 2” /К that advance radially at the phase velocity с (Fig. 2.2-3).

2.2 MONOCHROMATIC WAVES 49
x
Figure 2.2-3 Cross section of the wave-
= function of a spherical wave. The associated
wavefronts are a set of concentric spheres.

A spherical wave originating at the position го has a complex amplitude U(r) =
(Ao/|r — rol) exp(—Jjk |r — ro|). Its wavefronts are spheres centered about го. A wave
with complex amplitude U(r) = (Ao/r) exp(+jkr) is a spherical wave traveling
inwardly (toward the origin) instead of outwardly (away from the origin).

Fresnel Approximation of the Spherical Wave: The Paraboloidal Wave
Let us examine a spherical wave (originating at г = 0) at points r = (a, y, 2) that are
sufficiently close to the z axis but far from the origin, so that \/x? + у? < z. The
paraxial approximation of ray optics (Sec. 1.2) would be applicable were these points
the endpoints of rays beginning at the origin. Denoting 6? = (a? + y*)/z? < 1, we
use an approximation based on the Taylor-series expansion:
62 0“
pa VER PEE = VIF = 2(145-F4-)
62 2 2
аа) + И. (2.2-16)
2 2;
This expression, r 2+ (x? + у2)/22, is now substituted into the phase of U(r)
in (2.2-15). A less accurate expression, r = z, can be substituted for the magnitude
since it is less sensitive to errors than is the phase. The result is known as the Fresnel
approximation of a spherical wave:
A 2 2
U(r) = — exp(—jkz) exp [ie] . (2.2-17)
ad 22 Fresnel Approximation
of a Spherical Wave
This approximation plays an important role in simplifying the theory of optical-wave
transmission through apertures (diffraction), as discussed in Chapter 4.

The complex amplitude in (2.2-17) may be viewed as representing a plane wave
Ao exp(—jkz) modulated by the factor (1/2) exp[—jk(x? + y?)/2z], which involves
the phase k(x? + y”)/2z. This phase factor serves to bend the planar wavefronts of the
plane wave into paraboloidal surfaces (Fig. 2.2-4), since the equation of a paraboloid
of revolution is (22 + y?)/z = constant. In this region the spherical wave is well
approximated by a paraboloidal wave. When z becomes very large, the paraboloidal
phase factor in (2.2-17) approaches 0 so that the overall phase of the wave becomes
kz. Since the magnitude Ao/z varies slowly with z, the spherical wave eventually
approaches the plane wave exp(—jkz), as illustrated in Fig. 2.2-4.

The condition of validity for the Fresnel approximation is not simply that 6? < 1,
however. Although the third term of the series expansion, 04/8, may be very small

50  CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
x = Paraboloidal
a  $AW$V———~
7 EN Figure 2.2-4 A spherical wave may
< be approximated at points near the 2
(EX axis and sufficiently far from the origin
SY < by а paraboloidal wave. For points very
\ far from the origin, the spherical wave
N eee approaches a plane wave.
Spherical = Planar
in comparison with the second and first terms, when multiplied by kz it can become
comparable to л. The approximation used in the foregoing is therefore valid when
k20*/8 < л, or (2? +y)? < 423). For points (т, у) lying within a circle of radius a
centered about the z axis, the validity condition is thus a* < 4z3) or
№02
“Р”т & 1, (2.2-18)
4
where 9, = a/z is the maximum angle and
a2
Np = — (2.2-19)
rz Fresnel Number
is known as the Fresnel number.
НИ
EXERCISE 2.2-1
Validity of the Fresnel Approximation. Determine the radius of a circle within which а spher-
ical wave of wavelength \ = 633 nm, originating at a distance 1 m away, may be approximated by a
paraboloidal wave. Determine the maximum angle 6,,, and the Fresnel number Np.
ee
C. Paraxial Waves
A wave is said to be paraxial if its wavefront normals are paraxial rays. One way of
constructing a paraxial wave is to start with a plane wave A exp(—jkz), regard it as a
“carrier” wave, and modify or “modulate” its complex envelope A, making it a slowly
varying function of position, A(r), so that the complex amplitude of the modulated
wave becomes
U(r) = A(r) exp(—jkz) . (2.2-20)
The variation of the envelope A(r) and its derivative with position z must be slow
within the distance of a wavelength Л = 27/k so that the wave approximately main-
tains its underlying plane-wave nature.

The wavefunction of a paraxial wave, u(r, $) = |A(r)| cos[27vt—kz+arg{A(r)}],
is sketched in Fig. 2.2-5(а) as a function of z att = 0 and x = y = 0. It is a sinusoidal
function of z with amplitude |A(0,0, z)| and phase arg{A(0,0,z)}, both of which
vary slowly with =. Since the phase arg{ A(z, у, z)} changes little within the distance
of a wavelength, the planar wavefronts kz = 27q of the carrier plane wave bend only
slightly, so that their normals form paraxial rays [Fig. 2.2-5(6)].

2.2 MONOCHROMATIC WAVES 51
(0.0.2) Ae x Е т >
(а) ААА
Figure 2.2-5 (a) Wavefunction of a paraxial wave at point on the z axis as a function of the axial
distance =. (b) The wavefronts and wavefront normals of a paraxial wave in the x—z plane.
The Paraxial Helmholtz Equation
For the paraxial wave (2.2-20) to satisfy the Helmholtz equation (2.2-7), the complex
envelope A(r) must satisfy another partial differential equation that is obtained by
substituting (2.2-20) into (2.2-7). The assumption that A(r) varies slowly with respect
to z signifies that within a distance Az = А, the change AA is much smaller than A
itself, 1.е., AA < A. This inequality of complex variables applies to the magnitudes
of the real and imaginary parts separately. Since AA = (0A/0z)Az = (0A/0z)A, it
follows that ДА/02 < A/\ = Ak/2r, so that
OA
— «kA. (2.2-21)
Oz
The derivative 0A/0z itself must also vary slowly within the distance Л, so that
0° A/0z? < k0A/Oz, which provides
OA
5 «РА. (2.2-22)
Oz?
Substituting (2.2-20) into (2.2-7), and neglecting 0? А/0=? in comparison with К 0A/0z
or К? А, leads to a partial differential equation for the complex envelope A(r):
OA
VA — 7 2k— =0, (2.2-23)
Oz Paraxial Helmholtz Equation
where V7. = 02/05? + 0? /ду? is the transverse Laplacian operator.

Equation (2.2-23) is the slowly varying envelope approximation of the Helmholtz
equation. We shall simply call it the paraxial Helmholtz equation. It bears some
similarity to the Schrédinger equation of quantum physics [see (14.1-1)]. The simplest
solution of the paraxial Helmholtz equation is the paraboloidal wave (Exercise 2.2-2),
which is the paraxial approximation of a spherical wave. One of the most interesting
and useful solutions, however, is the Gaussian beam, to which Chapter 3 is devoted.
НИ
EXERCISE 2.2-2
The Paraboloidal Wave and the Gaussian Beam. _ Verify that a paraboloidal wave with
the complex envelope А(г) = (Ao/z) exp[—jk(a? + y?)/2z] [see (2.2-17)] satisfies the paraxial
Helmholtz equation (2.2-23). Show that the wave whose complex envelope is given by A(r) =

52 ~~ CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
[A1/q(z)] exp[—jk(x? + y?)/2q(z)], where q(z) = z + 120 and 20 is a constant, also satisfies the
paraxial Helmholtz equation. This wave, called the Gaussian beam, is the subject of Chapter 3. Sketch
the intensity of the Gaussian beam in the plane z = 0.
ee
*2.3 RELATION BETWEEN WAVE OPTICS AND RAY OPTICS

We proceed to show that ray optics emerges as the limit of wave optics when the
wavelength Л. — 0. Consider a monochromatic wave of free-space wavelength A,
in a medium with refractive index n(r) that varies sufficiently slowly with position
so that the medium may be regarded as locally homogeneous. We write the complex
amplitude in (2.2-5) in the form

U(r) = a(r) exp[—jkS(r)] , (2.3-1)
where a(r) is its magnitude, —k,5(r) is its phase, and К, = 27/, is the free-space
wavenumber. We assume that a(r) varies sufficiently slowly with r that it may be
regarded as constant within the distance of a wavelength Ло.

The wavefronts are the surfaces S(r) = constant and the wavefront normals point
in the direction of the gradient vector VS. In the neighborhood of a given position го,
the wave can be locally regarded аз a plane wave with amplitude а(го) and wavevector
К with magnitude К = п(го)Ко and direction parallel to the gradient vector VS at ro. A
different neighborhood exhibits a local plane wave of different amplitude and different
wavevector.

In ray optics it was shown that the optical rays are normal to the equilevel sur-
faces of a function S(r) called the eikonal (see Sec. 1.3C). We therefore associate
the local wavevectors (wavefront normals) in wave optics with the ray of ray optics
and recognize that the function S(r), which is proportional to the phase of the wave,
is nothing but the eikonal of ray optics (Fig. 2.3-1). This association has a formal
mathematical basis, as will be demonstrated shortly. With this analogy, ray optics can
serve to determine the approximate effects of optical components on the wavefront
normals, as illustrated in Fig. 2.3-1.

7
”
— — о
= ») — (We.
— — —
—
(a) № )
Figure 2.3-1 (а) The rays of ray optics are orthogonal to the wavefronts of wave optics (see also
Fig. 1.3-10). (b) The effect of a lens on rays and wavefronts.
The Eikonal Equation
Substituting (2.3-1) into the Helmholtz equation (2.2-7) provides
ke [n? — |У5 [2] a+ Va — jko [2У$.Уа-+ау”"$] =0, (2.3-2)
where а = a(r) and S = S(r). The real and imaginary parts of the left-hand side
of (2.3-2) must both vanish. Equating the real part to zero and using Ко = 2” /Ль, we

2.4 SIMPLE OPTICALCOMPONENTS 53
obtain
№ \* Va
|VS|? =n? + (>=) —. (2.3-3)
2п а
The assumption that a varies slowly over the distance Л, means that A2V?a/a < 1,
so that the second term of the right-hand side may be neglected in the limit A, — 0,
whereupon
IVS|? = n?. (2.3-4)
Eikonal Equation
This is the eikonal equation (1.3-20), which may be regarded as the main postulate of
ray optics (Fermat’s principle can be derived from the eikonal equation and vice versa).

Thus, the scalar function S(r), which is proportional to the phase in wave optics, is
the eikonal of ray optics. This is also consistent with the observation that in ray optics
S(rp) — $(гд) equals the optical pathlength between the points r4 and гв.

The eikonal equation is the limit of the Helmholtz equation when A, — 0. Given
n(r) we may use the eikonal equation to determine S(r). By equating the imaginary
part of (2.3-2) to zero, we obtain a relation between a and S, thereby permitting us to
determine the wavefunction.

2.4 SIMPLE OPTICAL COMPONENTS

In this section we examine the effects of optical components, such as mirrors, trans-
parent plates, prisms, and lenses, on optical waves.
A. Reflection and Refraction
Reflection from a Planar Mirror
A plane wave of wavevector Ку is incident onto a planar mirror located in free space
in the = = 0 plane. A reflected plane wave of wavevector kz is created. The angles
of incidence and reflection are 6; and 095, as illustrated in Fig. 2.4-1. The sum of the
two waves satisfies the Helmholtz equation if the wavenumber is the same, i.e., if
ky = ko = ko. Certain boundary conditions must be satisfied at the surface of the
mirror. Since these conditions are the same at all points (x, y), it is necessary that the
phases of the two waves match, 1.e.,

k,;-r=ko-r for all г = (x, y,0). (2.4-1)
This phase-matching condition may also be regarded as matching of the tangential
components of the two wavevectors in the mirror plane. Substituting г = (2, y,0),
К = (Козш 01,0, Ко соз 01), and ky = (k,sin62,0,—k,cos62) into (2.4-1), we
obtain kx sin 0: = Кох sin 05, from which 6; = 62, so that the angles of incidence
and reflection must be equal. Thus, the law of reflection of optical rays is applicable to
the wavevectors of plane waves.
Reflection and Refraction at a Planar Dielectric Boundary
We now consider a plane wave of wavevector К! incident on a planar boundary between
two homogeneous media of refractive indices n; and ng. The boundary lies in the

54 — СНАРТЕВ2 WAVE OPTICS
x
ko
Figure 2.4-1 Reflection of a plane wave from
р / Hy a planar mirror. Phase matching at the surface of
z the mirror requires that the angles of incidence and
и reflection be equal.
К
z = О plane (Fig. 2.4-2). Refracted and reflected plane waves of wavevectors Ко
and Кз emerge. The combination of the three waves satisfies the Helmholtz equation
everywhere if each of the waves has the appropriate wavenumber in the medium in
which it propagates (К: = Аз = n ky and kz = neko).
*f
ny | 2 к
<-> Figure 2.4-2 Refraction of a plane wave at а
dielectric boundary. The wavefronts are matched
5 at the boundary so that the distance between
wavefronts for the incident wave, \;/sin@; =
Ao/n1 sin 01, equals that for the refracted wave,
“6, 7 A2/ sin 05 = A,/n2 sin 65, from which Snell’s law
к, follows.

Since the boundary conditions are invariant to x and y, it is necessary that the phases

of the three waves match, 1.е.,

ki -r=ky-r=k3-r for all г = (x, y,0). (2.4-2)
This phase-matching condition is tantamount to matching the tangential components of
the three wavevectors at the boundary plane. Since ky = (nik, sin 01, 0, nik, cos 61),
Кз = (nko sin 63, 0, —nik, cos 63), and ky = (п2Ко sin 65, 0, nak, cos 02), where 01,
95, and 63 are the angles of incidence, refraction, and reflection, respectively, it follows
from (2.4-2) that 6; = 63 and пл sin @; = п2 sin 05. These are the laws of reflection
and refraction (Snell’s law) of ray optics, now applicable to the wavevectors.

It is not possible to determine the amplitudes of the reflected and refracted waves
using scalar wave optics since the boundary conditions are not completely specified in
this theory. This will be achieved in Sec. 6.2 using electromagnetic optics (Chapters 5
and 6).

B. Transmission Through Optical Components

We now proceed to examine the transmission of optical waves through transparent
optical components such as plates, prisms, and lenses. The effect of reflection at the
surfaces of these components will be ignored, since it cannot be properly accounted
for using the scalar wave theory of light. Nor can the effect of absorption in the
material, which is relegated to Sec. 5.5. The principal emphasis here is on the phase
shift introduced by these components and on the associated wavefront bending.

2.4 SIMPLE OPTICALCOMPONENTS 55
Transparent Plate
Consider first the transmission of a plane wave through a transparent plate of refractive
index n and thickness d surrounded by free space. The surfaces of the plate are the
planes z = 0 and z = d and the incident wave travels in the z direction (Fig. 2.4-3).
Let U(x, у, 2) be the complex amplitude of the wave. Since external and internal reflec-
tions are ignored, U(x, у, 2) is assumed to be continuous at the boundaries. The ratio
t(z,y) = U(a,y,d)/U(a, y,0) therefore represents the complex amplitude trans-
mittance of the plate; it permits us to determine U(x, у, d) for arbitrary U(x, у, 0) at
the input. The effect of reflection is considered in Sec. 6.2 and the effect of multiple
internal reflections within the plate is examined in Sec. 11.1.
Ао — — A

Figure 2.4-3 Transmission of а plane

wave through a transparent plate.

Once inside the plate, the wave continues to propagate as a plane wave with
wavenumber nk,, so that U(x, у, 2) is proportional to exp(—jnk,z). Thus, the ratio
U(a,y, d)/U(a,y,0) = exp(—jnkod), so that

t(x, у) = exp(—jnkod) . (2.4-3)
Transmittance
Transparent Plate
The plate is seen to introduce a phase shift nk,d = 2m(d/X).

If the incident plane wave makes an angle 9 with respect to the z axis and has
wavevector k (Fig. 2.4-4), the refracted and transmitted waves are also plane waves
with wavevectors К1 and К and angles 6; and 0, respectively, where 91 and 9 are related
by Snell’s law: sin 6 = nsin 91. The complex amplitude U(x, у, z) inside the plate is
now proportional to exp(—jk, - г) = exp|—jnk,(zcos6, + хэш 6))], so that the
complex amplitude transmittance of the plate U(x, у, d)/U(a, y, 0) is

t(z, y) = exp (—jnkod cos 01). (2.4-4)

If the angle of incidence 9 is small (i.e., if the incident wave is paraxial), then
0, = 6/n is also small and the approximation соз@ = 1 — 10} yields t(x,y) =
exp(—jnkod) ехр(1Ко0?а /2п). If the plate is sufficiently thin, and the angle 0 is suffi-
ciently small such that k,6?d/2n < 27 [or (а/Ль) 0? /2п < 1], then the transmittance
of the plate may be approximated by (2.4-3). Under these conditions the transmittance
of the plate is approximately independent of the angle 0.

Thin Transparent Plate of Varying Thickness

We now determine the amplitude transmittance of a thin transparent plate whose thick-
ness d(x, y) varies smoothly as a function of x and у, assuming that the incident wave
is an arbitrary paraxial wave. The plate lies between the planes z = 0 and z = do,
which are regarded as the boundaries encasing the optical component (Fig. 2.4-5).

56 — СНАРТЕВ2 WAVE OPTICS
7
n | “ 1 |
Z |
\\ , г 45)
„ |
a 1
| |
| |
1 |
I
| /
| „
| 7
Figure 2.4-4 Transmission of an oblique Figure 2.4-5 A transparent plate of vary-
plane wave through a thin transparent plate. ing thickness.

In the vicinity of the position (x, y,0) the incident paraxial wave may be regarded
locally as a plane wave traveling along a direction that makes a small angle with the z
axis. It crosses a thin plate of material of thickness d(x, у) surrounded by thin layers
of air of total thickness dg — d(x,y). In accordance with the approximate relation
(2.4-3), the local transmittance is the product of the transmittances of a thin layer of
air of thickness do — d(x, у) and a thin layer of material of thickness d(x, у), so that
t(x,y) © exp[—jnk,d(x, y)] exp[—jko(do — d(x, y))], from which

t(xz,y) = ho exp[—j(n — 1)kod(az, y)], (2.4-5)
Transmittance
Variable-Thickness Plate
where ho = exp(—jkodo) is a constant phase factor. This relation is valid in the
paraxial approximation (where all angles 9 are small) and when the thickness do is
sufficiently small so that (do/A,)0?/2n < 1.
ee
EXERCISE 2.4-1
Transmission Through a Prism. — Use (2.4-5) to show that the complex amplitude transmittance
of a thin inverted prism with small apex angle a «< 1 and thickness do (Fig. 2.4-6) is t(z,y) =
ho exp[—j (п — 1)а koa], where hy = exp(—jkodo). The transmittance is independent of y since the
prism extends in the y direction. What is the effect of the prism on an incident plane wave traveling
in the z direction? Compare your results with that obtained via the ray-optics model, as provided in
(1.2-7).
а
Figure 2.4-6 Transmission of а plane
wave through a thin prism.
а
0 2
НИ

2.4 SIMPLE OPTICAL COMPONENTS 57
тии |
EXAMPLE 2.4-1. Transmission Through а Biprism and an Axicon. The biprism de-
picted in Fig. 1.2-12(a) comprises an inverted prism, such as that illustrated in Fig. 2.4-6, juxtaposed
with an identical uninverted prism. Taking its thickness to be do and its edge angle a < 1, the results
of Exercise 2.4-1 generalize to t(z,y) = ho{exp|—j (п — Т)а Кох] + exp[+j (п — Т)ла Кот] } =
2ho cos [(n — Т)а Кох], with hg = exp(—jkodo). The biprism thus converts an incident plane wave
into a pair of waves that are tilted with respect to each other. The Fresnel biprism portrayed in Fig. 1.2-
12(b) behaves in the same way.

The cone-shaped axicon shown in Fig. 1.2-12(c) is constructed by rotating the prism cross section
depicted in Fig. 2.4-6 about a horizontal axis located at its top edge, from ¢ = —7 to 7. At any
angle @, the cross section of this device is an isosceles triangle of thickness do and edge anglea <
1. Using polar coordinates and integrating the results presented in Exercise 2.4-1 over @ provides
t(x,y) = ho J, expl-j (n— 1) a (ko cos @) x — j (n— Па (ko sin d) у db = ho J”, exp[—j (п—
1) ako 2? + у? sin(d + 6)| dd. Since the integration is over 27, the integral is independent of
9. Given that /”_ exp(—jusin ф) dd = 2rJo(u), where (и) is the Bessel function of the first
kind and zeroth order, the amplitude transmittance may be rewritten as t(x,y) = Зло Л (п —
Так \/ т? + у? |. The axicon thus converts an incident plane wave into an infinite number of plane
waves, all directed toward its central axis in the form of a cone of half angle (n — 1)a. This device
may be used to convert a plane wave into a Bessel beam (see Sec. 3.5A and Example 4.3-5).
ии |
Thin Lens
The general expression (2.4-5) for the complex amplitude transmittance of a thin trans-
parent plate of variable thickness is now applied to the plano-convex thin lens shown
in Fig. 2.4-7. Since the lens is the cap of a sphere of radius R, the thickness at the point
(x,y) is d(x,y) = do — PQ = do — (R— QC), or

d(x, у) = do — [п — /R— (a2 + 7) (2.4-6)
This expression may be simplified by considering only points for which x and y are
sufficiently small in comparison with R so that x7 + y* < R?. In that case
2 2 2 2
/ x+y 2 ту
where we have used the same Taylor-series expansion that led to the Fresnel approx-
imation of a spherical wave in (2.2-17). Using this approximation in (2.4-6) then
provides
d(a,y) ~d ey (2.4-8)
x = dg — ————.. 4-
‚У 0 28
Finally, substitution into (2.4-5) yields
2 2
. У
t(x,y) = ho exp Like ‚ (2.4-9)
Transmittance
Thin Lens
where
R
= (2.4-10)
п—1
is the focal length of the lens (see Sec. 1.2C) and ho = exp(—jnkodo) is another
constant phase factor that is usually of no significance.

58 CHAPTER 2 WAVE OPTICS
” Figure 2.4-7 А plano-convex thin lens.
any) The lens imparts a phase proportional to
g x? + у? to an incident plane wave, thereby
P с 5 transforming it into а paraboloidal wave
centered at a distance f from the lens (see
| Exercise 2.4-3).

а =>
с "_ыИШ[ЕРПииИищЩщщ
EXERCISE 2.4-2
Double-Convex Lens. Show that the complex amplitude transmittance of the double-convex
lens (also called a spherical lens) shown in Fig. 2.4-8 is given by (2.4-9) with

1 1 1
==(n-1)(—-—}. (2.4-11)
т (в)
You may prove this either by using the general formula (2.4-5) or by regarding the double-convex lens
as a cascade of two plano-convex lenses. Recall that, by convention, the radius of a convex/concave
surface is positive/negative, so that А; is positive and Во is negative for the lens displayed in Fig. 2.4-
8. The parameter f is recognized as the focal length of the lens [see (1.2-12)].
Figure 2.4-8 A double-convex lens.
EXERCISE 2.4-3
Focusing of a Plane Wave by a Thin Lens. Show that when a plane wave is transmitted
through a thin lens of focal length f in a direction parallel to the axis of the lens, it is converted
into a paraboloidal wave (the Fresnel approximation of a spherical wave) centered about a point at a
distance f from the lens, as illustrated in Fig. 2.4-9. What is the effect of the lens on a plane wave
incident at a small angle 0?
(te . Figure 2.4-9 A thin lens transforms a
5 plane wave into a paraboloidal wave.
EXERCISE 2.4-4
Imaging Property of a Lens. Show that a paraboloidal wave centered at the point P; (Fig. 2.4-
10) is converted by a lens of focal length f into a paraboloidal wave centered at P2, where 1/21 +
1/2> = 1/f, a formula known as the imaging equation.
р р Figure 2.4-10 А 1епз transforms a
41] (> paraboloidal wave into another paraboloidal
: < wave. The two waves are centered at
distances that satisfy the imaging equation.
ОИ

2.4 SIMPLE OPTICALCOMPONENTS 59

Diffraction Gratings

A diffraction grating is an optical component that serves to periodically modulate

the phase or amplitude of an incident wave. It can be made of a transparent plate with

periodically varying thickness or periodically graded refractive index (see Sec. 2.4C).

Repetitive arrays of diffracting elements such as apertures, obstacles, or absorbing

elements (see Sec. 4.3) can also be used for this purpose. A reflection diffraction

grating is often fabricated from a periodically ruled thin film of aluminum that has
been evaporated onto a glass substrate.

Consider a diffraction grating made of a thin transparent plate placed in the z = 0
plane whose thickness varies periodically in the x direction with period A (Fig. 2.4-
11). As will be demonstrated in Exercise 2.4-5, this plate converts an incident plane
wave of wavelength Л < A, traveling at a small angle 0; with respect to the z axis, into
several plane waves at small angles with respect to the z axis:

А
0g = A+ Чл (2.4-12)
Grating Equation
where 4 = 0,+1,+2,..., is called the diffraction order. Successive diffracted waves
are separated by an angle 9 = Л/Л, as shown schematically in Fig. 2.4-11.
wilt Figure 2.4-11 A thin transparent plate
ААА with periodically varying thickness serves
ААА diffracti : It spli incid:
ИИ as а diffraction grating. It splits an incident
НИЙ plane wave into multiple plane waves travel-
ly ing in different directions.
ee

EXERCISE 2.4-5

Transmission Through a Diffraction Grating.

(a) The thickness of a thin transparent plate varies sinusoidally in the x direction, d(«,y) = 5do[1+
cos(272/A)], as illustrated in Fig. 2.4-11. Show that the complex amplitude transmittance is
t(a,y) = ho exp[—j3(n — 1) до cos(272/A)] where ho = exp[—j3(n + 1) kod).

(b) Show that an incident plane wave traveling at a small angle 0; with respect to the z direction is
transmitted in the form of a sum of plane waves traveling at angles 0, given by (2.4-12). Hint:
Expand the periodic function (т, у) in a Fourier series.

ee

Equation (2.4-12) is valid only in the paraxial approximation, when all angles are
small, and when the period A is much greater than the wavelength Л. A more general
analysis of a thin diffraction grating that does not rely on the paraxial approximation
reveals that an incident plane wave at an angle 0; gives rise to a collection of plane
waves at angles 6, that satisfy )

sin 9. = sin@; + 1X . (2.4-13)

This result may be derived by expanding the periodic transmittance t(x, у) аз a sum

of Fourier components of the form exp(—jq27a/A), where 4 = 0,+1,+2,... is

60 CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
the diffraction order. An incident plane wave exp(—jka sin 0;), modulated by the
harmonic component exp(—jq272/A), generates a transmitted plane wave at the angle
6, given by exp(—jka sin 9.) сх exp(—jka sin 6;) exp(—jq27x/A). This leads to the
phase-matching condition k sin 6, = k sin @,+q27/A. Equation (2.4-13) follows since
К = 27/4; this result is also applicable to waves reflected from the grating.
Diffraction gratings are used as filters and spectrum analyzers. Since the angles
9. depend on the wavelength \ (and therefore on the frequency и), an incident poly-
chromatic wave is separated by the grating into its spectral components (Fig. 2.4-12).
Diffraction gratings have found numerous applications in spectroscopy.
R
G
B
Figure 2.4-12 A diffraction grating directs two
<= R+GeB Waves of different wavelengths, А! and Ag, into
two different directions, 6; and 95. It therefore
serves as a spectrum analyzer or a spectrometer.
В
R
C. Graded-Index Optical Components
The effect of a prism, lens, or diffraction grating on an incident optical wave lies in the
phase shift it imparts, which serves to bend the wavefront in some prescribed manner.
This phase shift is controlled by the variation in the thickness of the material with the
transverse distance from the optical axis (linearly, quadratically, or periodically, in the
cases of a prism, lens, and diffraction grating, respectively). The same phase shift may
instead be introduced by a transparent planar plate of fixed thickness but with varying
refractive index. This is a result of the fact that the thickness and refractive index appear
as a product in (2.4-3).
The complex amplitude transmittance of a thin transparent planar plate of thickness
do and graded refractive index n(x, у) is, from (2.4-3),
t(x,y) = exp [—Jjn(a, y)kodo] . (2.4-14)
Transmittance
Graded-Index Thin Plate
By selecting the appropriate variation of n(x,y) with x and y, the action of any
constant-index thin optical component can be reproduced, as demonstrated in Exer-
cise 2.4-6.
ee
EXERCISE 2.4-6
Graded-Index Lens. Show that a thin plate of uniform thickness do (Fig. 2.4-13) and quadrati-
cally graded refractive index n(2,y) = по[1 — 50°(x? + у?)], with ado < 1, acts as a lens of focal
length f = 1/nodoa? (see Exercise 1.3-1).
| | | | | | | | | | | KG „. Figure 2.4-13 A graded-index plate acts
as a lens.
ee

2.5 INTERFERENCE 61

2.5 INTERFERENCE
When two or more optical waves are simultaneously present in the same region of
space and time, the total wavefunction is the sum of the individual wavefunctions. This
basic principle of superposition follows from the linearity of the wave equation. For
monochromatic waves of the same frequency, the superposition principle carries over
to the complex amplitudes, which follows from the linearity of the Helmholtz equation.

The superposition principle does not apply to the optical intensity since the intensity
of the sum of two or more waves is not necessarily the sum of their intensities. The
disparity is associated with interference. The phenomenon of interference cannot be
explained on the basis of ray optics since it is dependent on the phase relationship
between the superposed waves.

In this section we examine the interference between two or more monochromatic
waves of the same frequency. The interference of waves of different frequencies is
discussed in Sec. 2.6.

A. Interference of Two Waves
When two monochromatic waves with complex amplitudes Uj (г) and U2(r) are super-
posed, the result is a monochromatic wave of the same frequency that has a complex
amplitude
U(r) = 01 (+) + Ua(r). (2.5-1)
In accordance with (2.2-10), the intensities of the constituent waves are I, = |U; | and
Ty = |052, while the intensity of the total wave is
IT =|U/? =|U, + U2|? = |0? + |052 + Uf U2 + 0105. (2.5-2)
The explicit dependence on r has been omitted for convenience. Substituting
U, = МП exp(jg1) аа Up = УЬ exp (ja) (2.5-3)
into (2.5-2), where ф1 and о are the phases of the two waves, we obtain
l=+h+2Vhip cosy, (2.5-4)
Interference Equation
with
ф= 92-91. (2.5-5)

This relation, called the interference equation, can also be understood in terms of
the geometry of the phasor diagram displayed in Fig. 2.5-1(a), which demonstrates that
the magnitude of the phasor U is sensitive not only to the magnitudes of the constituent
phasors but also to the phase difference y.

It is clear, therefore, that the intensity of the sum of the two waves is not the
sum of their intensities [Fig. 2.5-1(6)]; an additional term, attributed to interference
between the two waves, is present in (2.5-4). This term may be positive or negative,
corresponding to constructive or destructive interference, respectively. If Г! = [5 = Ip,
for example, then (2.5-4) yields Г = 21(1 + cosy) = 41 соз? (0/2), so that for
ф = 0, Г = 41 (e., the total intensity is four times the intensity of each of the

62 CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
1
U о I 1+ Ip
@) D> (0)
Zh 42 Lo Lo
т 27 0 27 40 ф
Figure 2.5-1 (а) Phasor diagram for the superposition of two waves of intensities Г, and [5 and
phase difference ф = y2 — фу. (6) Dependence of the total intensity J on the phase difference ф.
superposed waves). For y = 7, on the other hand, the superposed waves cancel one
another and the total intensity J = 0. Complete cancellation of the intensity in a region
of space is generally not possible unless the intensities of the constituent superposed
waves are equal. When ф = 7/2 or 37/2, the interference term vanishes and I = 210;
for these special phase relationships the total intensity is the sum of the constituent
intensities. The strong dependence of the intensity J on the phase difference ф permits
us to measure phase differences by detecting light intensity. This principle is used in
numerous optical systems.

Interference is accompanied by a spatial redistribution of the optical intensity with-
out a violation of power conservation. For example, the two waves may have uniform
intensities J, and [5 in a particular plane, but as а result of a position-dependent phase
difference y, the total intensity can be smaller than /; + Iz at some positions and larger
at others, with the total power (integral of the intensity) conserved.

Interference is not observed under ordinary lighting conditions since the random
fluctuations of the phases фл and ‹р2 cause the phase difference ф to assume random
values that are uniformly distributed between 0 and 27, so that cos y averages to 0 and
the interference term washes out. Light with such randomness is said to be partially
coherent and Chapter 12 is devoted to its study. The analysis carried out here, and in
subsequent chapters prior to Chapter 12, assume that the light is coherent, and therefore
deterministic.

Interferometers
Consider the superposition of two plane waves, each of intensity Jo, propagating in the
z direction, and assume that one wave is delayed by a distance d with respect to the
other so that U; = УК exp(—jkz) and Uz = УК exp[—jk(z — d)]. The intensity
I of the sum of these two waves can be determined by substituting [; = [5 = Ip and
ф = kd = 2rd/) into the interference equation (2.5-4),
d

I= 25 } + cos (25) . (2.5-6)
The dependence of Г оп the delay d is sketched in Fig. 2.5-2. When the delay is an
integer multiple of Л, complete constructive interference occurs and the total intensity
I = 45. On the other hand, when 4 is an odd integer multiple of \/2, complete
destructive interference occurs and Г = 0. The average intensity is the sum of the two
intensities, 1.е., 210.

An interferometer is an optical instrument that splits a wave into two waves us-
ing a beamsplitter, delays them by unequal distances, redirects them using mirrors,
recombines them using another (or the same) beamsplitter, and detects the intensity of
their superposition. Three important examples are illustrated in Fig. 2.5-3: фе Mach-
Zehnder interferometer, the Michelson interferometer, and the Sagnac interfero-
meter.

2.5 INTERFERENCE 63
1

Alp Figure 2.5-2 Dependence of the intensity J of
the superposition of two waves, each of intensity
2p \ | 7 В. №, on the delay distance d. When the delay
distance is a multiple of Л, the interference is
А А constructive; when it is an odd multiple of \/2,

0 the interference is destructive.

0 А 2X ЗА а
ра = к
Uo fi ~~ ,

a Ui ив = | ши |
Uy UL = U> _
02 уе и? 70 2

(a) Mach-Zehnder (b) Michelson (c) Sagnac

Figure 2.5-3  Interferometers: A wave Up is split into two waves Оз and 05 (they are shown аз
shaded light and dark for ease of visualization but are actually congruent). After traveling through
different paths, the waves are recombined into a superposition wave U = U; + U2 whose intensity is
recorded. The waves are split and recombined using beamsplitters. In the Sagnac interferometer the
two waves travel through the same path, but in opposite directions.

Since the intensity I is sensitive to the phase ф = 27d/A = 2ппа/Ло = 2anvd/co,
where d is the difference between the distances traveled by the two waves, the inter-
ferometer can be used to measure small changes in the distance d, the refractive index
п, or the wavelength Л» (or frequency v’). For example, if d/, = 10%, a change of the
refractive index of only An = 10-4 corresponds to an easily observable phase change
Ay = 2r. The phase ф also changes by a full 27 if d changes Бу a wavelength \. An
incremental change of the frequency Av = c/d has the same effect.

Interferometers have numerous applications. These include the determination of
distance in metrological applications such as strain measurement and surface profiling;
refractive-index measurements; and spectrometry for the analysis of polychromatic
light (see Sec. 12.2B). In the Sagnac interferometer the optical paths are identical but
opposite in direction, so that rotation of the interferometer results in a phase shift y
proportional to the angular velocity of rotation. This system can therefore be used as
a gyroscope. Because of its precision, optical interferometry is also being co-opted to
detect the passage of gravitational waves, as discussed subsequently.

Finally, we demonstrate that energy conservation in an interferometer requires that
the phases of the waves reflected and transmitted at a beamsplitter differ by 7/2. Each
of the interferometers considered in Fig. 2.5-3 has an output wave U = U; + (5 that
exits from one side of the beamsplitter and also another output wave U’ = Uj + US
that exits from the opposite side. Energy conservation dictates that the sum of the
intensities of these two waves must equal the intensity of the incident wave, so that
if one output wave has high intensity by virtue of constructive interference, the other
must have low intensity by virtue of destructive interference. This complementarity can
only be achieved if the phase differences ф and y’, associated with the components of
output waves U and U’, respectively, differ by п. Since the components of U and the
components of U’ experience the same pathlength differences, and the same numbers
of reflections from mirrors, the 7 phase difference must be attributable to different
phases introduced by the beamsplitter upon reflection and transmission. Examination

64 CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
of the three interferometers in Fig. 2.5-3 reveals that for one output wave, each of the
components is transmitted through the beamsplitter once and reflected from it once,
so that no phase difference is introduced. However, for the other output wave, one
component is transmitted twice and the other is reflected twice, thereby introducing
the phase difference of п. It follows that the phases of the reflected and transmitted
waves at a beamsplitter differ by 7/2. This important property of the beamsplitter is
considered in more detail in Example 7.1-6.
Interference of Two Oblique Plane Waves
Consider now the interference of two plane waves of equal intensities: one propagating
in the z direction, U; = Ip exp(—jkz); the other propagating at an angle 9 with
respect to the z axis, in the х—= plane, Uz = УГ exp|—j(kcos@ z+ ksin@ x)], as
illustrated in Fig. 2.5-4. At the z = 0 plane the two waves have a phase difference
y =ksin@ т, for which the interference equation (2.5-4) yields a total intensity
I = 20 [1+ cos(ksin@ x)] . (2.5-7)
This pattern varies sinusoidally with x, with period 277/k sin @ = Л/ sin @, as shown in
Fig. 2.5-4. If 9 = 30°, for example, the period is 2A. This suggests a method of printing
a sinusoidal pattern of high resolution for use as a diffraction grating. It also suggests
a method of monitoring the angle of arrival 09 of a wave by mixing it with a reference
wave and recording the resultant intensity distribution. As discussed in Sec. 4.5, this is
the principle that lies behind holography.
м * Interference
и, = pattern
NINO Figure 2.5-4 The interference
ААА Г = of two plane waves traveling at an
Wt ААААААААА angle 0 with respect to each other
\\\\ \\\ К: :
у results in a sinusoidal intensity pat-
A/sind tern in the x direction with period
\ .
d A/ sind.
NF
ow
U2 \

Wr
ee
EXERCISE 2.5-1
Interference of a Plane Wave and a Spherical Wave. — А plane wave traveling along the
= direction with complex amplitude A, exp(—jkz), and a spherical wave centered at z = 0 and
approximated by the paraboloidal wave of complex amplitude (A2/z) exp(—jkz) exp|—jk(a? +
y’) /2z] [see (2.2-17)], interfere in the z = d plane. Derive an expression for the total intensity
I(x,y, а). Assuming that the two waves have the same intensities at the z = а plane, verify that the
locus of points of zero intensity is a set of concentric rings, as illustrated in Fig. 2.5-5.

2.5 INTERFERENCE 65
ANN ee А Figure 2.5-5 The interference of a plane
(< Е Wy) у wave and a spherical wave creates a pattern of
a \“S =) concentric rings (illustrated at the plane 2 = а).
EXERCISE 2.5-2
Interference of Two Spherical Waves. Two spherical waves of equal intensity Го, originating
at the points (—a,0,0) and (a, 0,0), interfere in the plane z = 4 as illustrated in Fig. 2.5-6. This
double-pinhole system is similar to that used by Thomas Young in his celebrated double-slit exper-
iment in which he demonstrated interference. Use the paraboloidal approximation for the spherical
waves to show that the intensity at the plane z = d is
2
I(x, y,d) © 2Ip (1 + cos ont | (2.5-8)
where the angle subtended by the centers of the two waves at the observation plane is 9 = 2a/d. The
intensity pattern is periodic with period \/6.
А
ый WK
AW
МАМА
9-4 }| Ms 1, LO
x AN
— >. = 2а и ЗИ -—=
м ИИ
‘ By Yi]
_ т
Qs
d ——
| x
Figure 2.5-6 Interference of two spherical waves of equal intensities originating at the points P,
and P,. The two waves can be obtained by permitting a plane wave to impinge оп two pinholes in a
screen. The light intensity at an observation plane a large distance d from the pinholes takes the form
of a sinusoidal interference pattern, with period = 4/6, along the direction of the line connecting the
pinholes.
НИ
В. Multiple-Wave Interference
The superposition of М monochromatic waves of the same frequency, with complex
amplitudes (1, U2,...,Ui, gives rise to a wave whose frequency remains the same
and whose complex amplitude is given by U = (1 + 0. + --- + Ом. Knowledge of
the intensities of the individual waves, Г, [2,..., Гм, is not sufficient to determine the
total intensity J = |U|? since the relative phases must also be known. The role played
by the phase is dramatically illustrated in the following examples.

66 — СНАРТЕВ2 WAVE OPTICS
Interference of M Waves with Equal Amplitudes and Equal Phase
Differences
We first examine the interference of М waves with complex amplitudes
Um = МЮ ехр|7 (т — 1)$]|, т = 1,2,...,М. (2.5-9)
The waves have equal intensities Го, and phase difference ‹р between successive waves,
as illustrated in Fig. 2.5-7(a). To derive an expression for the intensity of the super-
position, it is convenient to introduce the quantity h = exp(jy) whereupon Им =
VI h™—!. The complex amplitude of the superposed wave is then
1—h™
= УЕ ++) = Vp -—
1- М
_ Vo exp(j ф) (2.5-10)
1 — exp(j¢)
which has the corresponding intensity
—jMg/2) — exp(jMg/2) |?
exp(—jp/2) — exp(j¢/2)
whence
+2
МФ/2
I= ppt Me?) , (2.5-12)
sin’ (ф/2) Interference of М Waves
Um I
VE ИФ
on
Mi Ба №
T}--f-}----- b---- ------F = -
Figure 2.5-7 (a) The sum of М phasors of equal magnitudes and equal phase differences. (b) The
intensity J as a function of y. The peak intensity occurs when all the phasors are aligned; it is then
М times greater than the mean intensity J = M Jp. In this example М = 5.

The intensity J is evidently strongly dependent on the phase difference y, as illus-
trated in Fig. 2.5-7(6) for М = 5. When y = 27q, where 4 is an integer, all the phasors
are aligned зо that the amplitude of the total wave is М times that of an individual
component, and the intensity reaches its peak value of M?Jp. The mean intensity
averaged over a uniform distribution of y is Г = (1/27) fer Idp = МЮ, which
is the same as the result obtained in the absence of interference. The peak intensity is
therefore М times greater than the mean intensity. The sensitivity of the intensity to the

2.5 INTERFERENCE 67
phase is therefore dramatic for large M. At its peak value, the intensity is magnified
by a factor М over the mean but it decreases sharply as the phase difference ф deviates
slightly from 274. In particular, when y = 27/M the intensity becomes zero. It is
instructive to compare Fig. 2.5-7(b) for M = 5 with Fig. 2.5-2 for M = 2.
ee
EXERCISE 2.5-3
Bragg Reflection. Consider light reflected at an angle 9 from М parallel reflecting planes
separated by a distance A, as shown in Fig. 2.5-8. Assume that only a small fraction of the light
is reflected from each plane, so that the amplitudes of the M reflected waves are approximately
equal. Show that the reflected waves have a phase difference фр = k(2A sin) and that the angle 6 at
which the intensity of the total reflected light is maximum satisfies

. А
эт дв = 3A: (2.5-13)
2 Bragg Angle
This equation defines the Bragg angle 0.3. Such reflections are encountered when light is reflected
from a multilayer structure (see Sec. 7.1) or when X-ray waves are reflected from atomic planes in
crystalline structures. It also occurs when light is reflected from a periodic structure created by an
acoustic wave (see Chapter 20). An exact treatment of Bragg reflection is provided in Sec. 7.1C.
12..M
п
02
uu р Figure 2.5-8 Reflection of a plane wave from
\ й М parallel planes separated from each other
KC] by a distance A. The reflected waves interfere
AN constructively and yield maximum intensity when
й й the angle 0 is the Bragg angle 03. Note that 0 is
й defined with respect to the parallel planes.
Al
9
НЕА
НИ
Fresnel Zone Plate
A Fresnel zone plate comprises a set of ring apertures of increasing radii, decreasing
widths, and equal areas, as illustrated in Fig. 2.5-9.
] Ро о Figure 2.5-9 The Fresnel zone
Oy > Se — plate serves as a spherical lens with
Ye z on multiple focal lengths.
20 И
7 [ГК
_, И =
—__
The structure serves as a spherical lens with multiple focal lengths, as may be under-
stood from the perspective of interference. The center of the mth ring has a radius

68 CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS

рт at the mth peak of the cosine function, 1.е., пр”, /Af = т2т [see (2.4-9)]. At a
focal point z = f, the distance В» to the mth ring is given by В? = f? + p2,, so
that Ry = \/ f? + 2mAf. If f is sufficiently large so that the angles subtended by the
rings are small, then a Taylor-series expansion provides Вт = }-+тл. Thus, the waves
transmitted through consecutive rings have pathlengths differing by a wavelength, so
that they interfere constructively at the focal point. A similar argument applies for the
other foci. The operation of the Fresnel zone plate may also be understood from the
perspective of Fourier optics, as explained in Sec. 4.1A.

Interference of an Infinite Number of Waves of Progressively Smaller
Amplitudes and Equal Phase Differences

We now examine the superposition of an infinite number of waves with equal phase
differences and with amplitudes that decrease at a geometric rate:

Uj =VIp, Us=hUy, ==, ..., (2.5-14)
where h = |hle?, |h| < 1, and Jp is the intensity of the initial wave. The amplitude of
the mth wave is smaller than that of the (m — 1)st wave by the factor |h| and the phase
differs by y. The phasor diagram is shown in Fig. 2.5-10(а).

I
Imax [77 —,
/ F=2 [> т
м Urke
U2 “ =
и. F=10
0 27 AT Ф
Figure 2.5-10 (a) The sum of an infinite number of phasors whose magnitudes are successively
reduced at a geometric rate and whose phase differences ф are equal. (6) Dependence of the intensity
I on the phase difference ‹ф for two values of F. Peak values occur at ф = 27q. The full width at half
maximum of each peak is approximately 27 /F when F >> 1. The sharpness of the peaks increases
with increasing F.
The superposition wave has a complex amplitude
И =U,4+U2+U3+4+---
= Vip (lth+h? +---)
1 1
— У — vio (2.5-15)
1-й 1-|hle
The total intensity is then
I 1
I= |UP = —“—,, = ——__7>__,___ (2.5-16)
iL — alee? (1 —|hj cosy)? + [AP sin? p
from which
Io
f= к. 2.5-17
(1 — Иа sin?(2/2) eer?

2.5 INTERFERENCE 69
It is convenient to write this equation in the form
P= ye = OG, (2.5-18)
1 + (2F/7)° sin” (ф/2) (1 — |h]) Intensity of an Infinite
Number of Waves
where the quantity
g — tv (2.5-19)
1-й Finesse
is a parameter known as the finesse.

The intensity I is a periodic function of ф with period 27, as illustrated in Fig. 2.5-
10(5). It reaches its maximum value Jinax When ф = 27q, where 4 is an integer. This
occurs when the phasors align to form a straight line. (This result is not unlike that
displayed in Fig. 2.5-7(b) for the interference of М waves of equal amplitudes and
equal phase differences.) When the finesse 5 is large (i.e., the factor |h| is close to 1),
I becomes a sharply peaked function of y. Consider values of y near the y = 0 peak,
as a representative example. For |ф| < 1, sin(y/2) = ф/2 whereupon (2.5-18) can be
written as

Imax

Тя Ее. (2.5-20)
The intensity J then decreases to half Из peak value when ф = 7/F, so that the full-

width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the peak becomes
Ар= on . (2.5-21)
У Width of Interference Pattern
In the regime F >> 1, we then have Ay < 27 and the assumption that py < 1 is
applicable. The finesse У is the ratio of the period 27 to the FWHM of the peaks in
the interference pattern. It is therefore a measure of the sharpness of the interference
function, 1.е., the sensitivity of the intensity to deviations of y from the values 27q

corresponding to the peaks.

A useful device based on this principle is the Fabry—Perot interferometer. It consists
of two parallel mirrors within which light undergoes multiple reflections. In the course
of each round trip, the light suffers a fixed amplitude reduction |h| = |r|, arising from
losses at the mirrors, and a phase shift ф = k2d = 4avd/c = 2пи/ (c/2d) associated
with the propagation, where d is the mirror separation. The total light intensity depends
on the phase shift ф in accordance with (2.5-18), attaining maxima when ф/2 is an
integer multiple of 7. The proportionality of the phase shift ~ to the optical frequency
и shows that the intensity transmission of the Fabry—Perot device will exhibit peaks
separated in frequency by c/2d. The width of these peaks will be (c/2d)/F, where the
finesse F is governed by the loss via (2.5-19). The Fabry—Perot interferometer, which
also serves as a spectrum analyzer, is considered further in Sec. 7.1B. It is commonly
used as a resonator for lasers, as discussed in Secs. 11.1 and 16.1A.

70 — СНАРТЕВ2 WAVE OPTICS
тии |
EXAMPLE 2.5-1. The МСО Interferometer. The LIGO interferometer’ comprises a Michel-
son interferometer (MI) with a Fabry—Perot interferometer (FPI) embedded in each of its reflecting
arms, as illustrated in Fig. 2.5-11. The MI is sensitive to the phase difference encountered by the
optical waves that propagate through its arms; the FPIs serve to amplify the phases in each arm and
thereby to significantly increase the sensitivity of the overall instrument.

If the phase shift encountered in a double pass within the FPI is denoted ‹р, the phase of the overall
intracavity reflecting field U is, in accordance with (2.5-15),

1 [М sin y

arg{U} = arg { те \ = arctan { № ne I . (2.5-22)
If vy is taken to be an integer multiple of 27, to which is added а very small double-pass deviation
2Ay < т, a Taylor-series expansion of (2.5-22) yields arg{U} = 2Ay|h|/(1 — |h]). This result
is closely related to the finesse of the FPI, F = 7/|h| /(1 — |h|), as provided in (2.5-19). When
|h| = 1 and the finesse is high, we have arg{U} = 2Ay-1/(1 — |h|) and $ = л/(1 — [1]), so
that arg{U} = (24/7) Ay. Thus, a very small phase deviation Ay imposed оп the FPI is amplified
by the factor 2F/7, which is large. This phase amplification results from the many reflections of the
light between the mirrors of the FPI, which effectively increases its length and thus its sensitivity.

The interference pattern associated with the Michelson interferometer is characterized by the two-
wave interference equation (2.5-4). If the light injected into both of its arms is of equal intensity, i.e.,
Е =Ь = $1o, (2.5-4) becomes I = Io[1 + cos(y2 — ф1)]. If the interferometer is then operated
at a null and the phases for the two arms are taken to be y2,1 = (29 /л) Ао 1, the МСО interference
pattern is given by

1 — cos 25 (Ags -Афр,). (2.5-23)
The LIGO interferometer is thus a factor of 2¥/7 more sensitive to the phase difference Ayo — Ay
than is a Michelson interferometer with the same arm lengths.

This increased sensitivity is the rationale for using the LIGO interferometer as a gravitational-
wave detector. Generated by cataclysmic events in the distant universe, gravitational waves impose a
dynamic strain on the fabric of space, which results in differential length variations in the orthogonal
arms of the interferometer. This in turn modulates the phase difference Ay. — Ay), resulting in
an overall light intensity whose magnitude is proportional to the gravitational-wave-induced strain.
Gravitational waves were first detected by LIGO in 2015, a hundred years after Einstein first predicted
their existence.*

Figure 2.5-11 The LIGO interferometer is a Michel-
it son interferometer (MI) with Fabry—Perot interferometers
FPI | | а (FPIs) nested in each of its arms. Each FPI in the advanced-
LIGO instrument has a length d + 4km and a finesse F =
| 450, so that the enhancement in sensitivity with respect to
м Е an ordinary MI is 29/л = 286. The gravitational wave
77. observed in 2015 imparted to the LIGO interferometer a
—— = differential spatial strain (Ady — Ad,)/d = Ad/d with
<— a magnitude of roughly 5 x 10-22, which corresponds to
k— d—>| a differential length deviation Ad of about 2 am (some
400 times smaller than the radius of a proton). The light
source was а 20-W Nd:YAG laser operated at \, = co /v =
| | 1.064 ит. The corresponding phase difference Ayo —
Ay, thus had a magnitude of 27vAd/c, = 1.8 x 1074
rad; its oscillations were in the audio-frequency range.
«ПИ

1 LIGO is an acronym for Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory, a facility with dual sites in
Livingston, Louisiana and Hanford, Washington.

* B. Р. Abbott ef al., Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger, Physical Review
Letters, vol. 116, 061102, 2016. The near-simultaneous detections at both LIGO sites, which are separated by a
distance of = 3000 km and a time of + 10 msec, unequivocally confirmed the cosmological origin of the waves.

2.6 POLYCHROMATIC AND PULSED LIGHT 71
2.6 POLYCHROMATIC AND PULSED LIGHT

Since the wavefunction of monochromatic light is a harmonic function of time extend-
ing over all time (from —oo to со), it is an idealization that cannot be met in reality.
This section is devoted to waves of arbitrary time dependence, including optical pulses
of finite time duration. Such waves are polychromatic rather than monochromatic. A
more detailed introduction to the optics of pulsed light is provided in Chapter 23.
A. Temporal and Spectral Description
Although a polychromatic wave is described by a wavefunction u(r,t) with nonhar-
monic time dependence, it may be expanded as a superposition of harmonic func-
tions, each of which represents a monochromatic wave. Since we already know how
monochromatic waves propagate in free space and through various optical components,
we can determine the effect of optical systems on polychromatic light by using the
principle of superposition.

Fourier methods permit the expansion of an arbitrary function of time u(t), repre-
senting the wavefunction u(r,t) at a fixed position г, as a superposition integral of
harmonic functions of different frequencies, amplitudes, and phases:

Co
u(t) = ] v(v) exp(j27vt) dv , (2.6-1)
—oo
where (и) is determined by carrying out the Fourier transform
Cc
v(v) = ] u(t) exp(—j2mvt) dt. (2.6-2)
—oo
A review of the Fourier transform and its properties is presented in Sec. A.1 of
Appendix A. The expansion in (2.6-1) extends over positive and negative frequencies.
However, since u(t) is real, v(—v) = v*(v) (see Sec. А.Т). Thus, the negative-
frequency components are not independent; they are simply conjugated versions of the
corresponding positive-frequency components.
Complex Representation
It is convenient to represent the real function u(t) in (2.6-1) by a complex function
CO
U(t) = 2 | v(v) exp(j2avt) dv (2.6-3)
0
that includes only the positive-frequency components (multiplied by a factor of 2), and
suppresses all the negative frequencies. The Fourier transform of U(t) is therefore a
function V(v) = 2v(v) for > 0, and 0 for v < 0.

The real function u(t) can be determined from its complex representation U(t) by
simply taking the real part,

u(t) = Re{U(t)} = $[U(t) + U*(t)]. (2.6-4)
The complex function U(t) is known as the complex analytic signal. The validity of
(2.6-4) can be verified by breaking the integral in (2.6-1) into two parts, with limits
from 0 to +00 and from —oo to 0. The first integral equals 4U(t) by virtue of (2.6-3),
whereas the second is given by

72  CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
0 со
] u(v) exp(j2mvt) dv = ] u(—v) exp(—j2nvt) dv
со 0
Co
- | ©" (и) exp(—j2mvt) dv = 4U*(t). (2.6-5)
0
The first step above reflects a simple change of variable from v to —v, while the second
step uses the symmetry relation v(—v) = v*(v). The net result is that u(t) can be
expressed as a sum of the complex function 3U (t) and its conjugate, confirming (2.6-
4).

As a simple example, the complex representation of the real harmonic function
u(t) = cos(wt) is the complex harmonic function U(t) = exp(jwt). This is the
complex representation introduced in Sec. 2.2A for monochromatic waves. In fact,
the complex representation of a polychromatic wave, as described in this section, is
simply a superposition of the complex representations of each of its monochromatic
Fourier components.

The complex analytic signal corresponding to the wavefunction u(r,t) is called
the complex wavefunction U(r, t). Since each of its Fourier components satisfies the
wave equation, so too does the complex wavefunction U(r, t),

1 020
VU - 5-5 =0. (2.6-6)
с? Ot
Wave Equation

Figure 2.6-1 shows the magnitudes of the Fourier transforms of the wavefunction
u(r,t) and the complex wavefunction U(r,t). In this illustration the optical wave
is quasi-monochromatic, i.e., it has Fourier components with frequencies confined
within a narrow band of width Av surrounding a central frequency vo, such that
Av < %.

u(r, | МИ, to
(а) (d)
М 0 и и 0 yy И
Figure 2.6-1 (а) The magnitude |v(r,v)| of the Fourier transform of the wavefunction u(r, t).
(b) The magnitude |V (r, v)| of the Fourier transform of the corresponding complex wavefunction
U(r,t).
Intensity of a Polychromatic Wave
The optical intensity is related to the wavefunction by (2.1-3):
I(r, t) = 2(u*(r, t))
=2 ({3 [U (r,t) + U*(r,t)]})
= 5 (U(r, t)) + 4 (U(r, t)) + (U(r, 90*(с, 5). (2.6-7)

2.6 POLYCHROMATIC AND PULSED LIGHT 73
For а quasi-monochromatic wave with central frequency vp and spectral width Ди <
Vo, the average (-) is taken over a time interval much longer than the time of an
optical cycle 1/м but much shorter than 1/Av (see Sec. 2.1). Since U(r, t) is given
by (2.6-4), the term U? in (2.6-7) has components oscillating at frequencies = 21.
Similarly, the components of U*? oscillate at frequencies = —2vp. These terms are
therefore washed out by the averaging operation. The third term, however, contains
only frequency differences, which are of the order of Ди < vp. It therefore varies
slowly and is unaffected by the time-averaging operation. Thus, the third term in (2.6-
7) survives and the light intensity becomes
I(r,t) = |U(r,t)|? . (2.6-8)
Optical Intensity

The optical intensity of a quasi-monochromatic wave is the absolute square of its

complex wavefunction.

The simplicity of this result is, in fact, the rationale for introducing the concept of the
complex wavefunction.
Pulsed Plane Wave
The simplest example of pulsed light is a pulsed plane wave. The complex wavefunc-
tion has the form
z . z

U(r, t) = A(t — =) ехр [ти (i — =) ; (2.6-9)
where the complex envelope A(t) is a time-varying function and № is the central
optical frequency. The monochromatic plane wave is a special case of (2.6-9) for which
A(t) is constant, 1.е., U(r, t) = A exp|j271(t — z/c)] = A exp(—jkoz) exp(jwot),
where Хо = wo/c and wo = 2m.

Since U(r, t) in (2.6-9) is a function of t — z/c it satisfies the wave equation (2.6-6)
regardless of the form of the function A(-) (provided that d?.4 /dt? exists). This can be
verified by direct substitution.

If A(t) is of finite duration 7, then at any fixed position z the wave lasts for a
time period т, and at any fixed time + it extends over a distance ст. It is therefore a
wavepacket of fixed extent traveling in the z direction (Fig. 2.6-2). As an example, a
pulse of duration 7 = 1 ps extends over a distance cr = 0.3 mm in free space.

The Fourier transform of the complex wavefunction in (2.6-9) is

V(r,v) = A(v — м) exp(—j2avz/c) , (2.6-10)
where A(v) is the Fourier transform of A(t). This may be shown by use of the fre-
quency translation property of the Fourier transform (see Sec. А.1 of Appendix А).
The complex envelope A(t) is often slowly varying in comparison with an optical
cycle, so that its Fourier transform A(v) has a spectral width Av much smaller than the
central frequency мо. The spectral width Av is inversely proportional to the temporal
width т. In particular, if A(t) is Gaussian, then its Fourier transform A(v) is also
Gaussian. If the temporal and spectral widths are defined as the power-RMS widths,
then their product equals 1/47 (see Sec. A.2 of Appendix A). For example, if 7 = 1 ps,
then Av = 80 GHz. If the central frequency мо is 5 x 10‘* Hz (corresponding to
Ло = 0.6 ym), then Av/v = 1.6 x 107+, so that the light is quasi-monochromatic.
Fig. 2.6-2 illustrates the temporal, spatial, and spectral characteristics of the pulsed
plane wave in terms of the wavefunction.

74 — CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
ТО] “ст |A(v)| [У]

к о 0 [РА : < Av Av

| a at + T AN hs

|” 0 и 0 м и
(а) (В) (с) (4)

Figure 2.6-2 Temporal, spatial, and spectral characteristics of a pulsed plane wave. (а) The
wavefunction at a fixed position has duration 7. (b) The wavefunction as a function of position at
times t and $ + Т. The pulse travels with speed с and occupies a distance ст. (c) The magnitude
|A(v)| of the Fourier transform of the complex envelope. (d) The magnitude |V (v)| of the Fourier
transform of the complex wavefunction is centered at 1%.

The propagation of a pulsed plane wave through a medium with frequency-
dependent refractive index (i.e., with a frequency-dependent speed of light c = c,/n) is
discussed in Sec. 5.7 while other aspects of pulsed optics are considered in Chapter 23.
B. Light Beating
The dependence of the intensity of a polychromatic wave on time may be attributed
to interference among the monochromatic components that constitute the wave. This
concept is now demonstrated by means of two examples: interference between two
monochromatic waves and interference among a finite number of monochromatic
waves.

Interference of Two Monochromatic Waves of Different Frequencies
An optical wave composed of two monochromatic waves of frequencies 1, and 12 and
intensities Г! and [5 has a complex wavefunction at some location in space

U(t) = УП exp(j2mt) + VI exp(j2mv2t) , (2.6-11)
where the phases are taken to be zero and the r dependence has been suppressed for
convenience. The intensity of the total wave is determined by use of the interference
equation (2.5-4),

T(t)=h+h+2Vhlh cos [27 (0-й. (2.6-12)

The intensity therefore varies sinusoidally at the difference frequency |v — |, which
is known as the beat frequency. This phenomenon goes by a number of names:
light beating, optical mixing, photomixing, optical heterodyning, and coherent
detection.

Equation (2.6-12) is analogous to (2.5-7), which describes the spatial interference
of two waves of the same frequency traveling in different directions. This can be
understood in terms of the phasor diagram in Fig. 2.5-1. The two phasors U; and U2
rotate at angular frequencies w, = 271, and w2 = 271, so that the difference angle is
p= 2 — 91 = 2n(V2 — м), in accord with (2.6-12). Waves of different frequencies
traveling in different directions exhibit spatiotemporal interference.

In electronics, beating or mixing is said to occur when the sum of two sinusoidal
signals is detected by a nonlinear (e.g., quadratic) device called a mixer, producing
signals at the difference and sum frequencies. This device is used in heterodyne radio
receivers. In optics, photodetectors are responsive to the optical (Sec. 19.1B), or optical
intensity which, in accordance with (2.6-8), is proportional to the absolute square of the

2.6 POLYCHROMATIC AND PULSED LIGHT 75
complex wavefunction. Optical detectors are therefore sensitive only to the difference
frequency.

Much as (2.5-7) provides the basis for determining the direction of a wave via the
spatial interference pattern at a screen, (2.6-12) provides a way of determining the
frequency of an optical wave by measuring the temporal interference pattern at the
output of a photodetector. The use of optical beating in optical heterodyne receivers is
discussed in Sec. 25.4. Other forms of optical mixing make use of nonlinear media to
generate optical-frequency differences and sums, as described in Chapter 22.
[|
EXERCISE 2.6-1
Optical Doppler Radar. — As a result of the Doppler effect, a monochromatic optical wave of
frequency v, reflected from an object moving with a velocity component v along the line of sight
from an observer, undergoes a frequency shift Av = +(2v/c) v, depending on whether the object is
moving toward (+) or away (—) from the observer. Assuming that the original and reflected waves
are superimposed, derive an expression for the intensity of the resultant wave. Suggest a method for
measuring the velocity of a target using such an arrangement. If one of the mirrors of a Michelson
interferometer [Fig. 2.5-3(b)] moves with velocity +v, use (2.5-6) to show that the beat frequency is
+(2v/c)v.
a
Interference of M Monochromatic Waves with Equal Intensities and
Equally Spaced Frequencies
The interference of a large number of monochromatic waves with equal intensities,
equal phases, and equally spaced frequencies can result in the generation of brief pulses
of light. Consider an odd number of waves, М = 2Г + 1, each with intensity Го and
zero phase, and with frequencies

Vg = м + Que, q=—-L,...,0,...L, (2.6-13)
centered about frequency м and spaced by frequency vp < Vv. At a given position,
the total wave has a complex wavefunction

L
U(t) = VIo У` exp [j2m(vp + qur)t] . (2.6-14)
q=-L
This represents the sum of М phasors of equal magnitudes and successive phases that
differ by ф = 2пирф. Results for the intensity are immediately available from the
analysis carried out in Sec. 2.5B, which is mathematically identical to the case at hand.
Referring to (2.5-12) and Fig. 2.5-7, and using the substitution ф = 2at/Tr with
Те = 1/vp, the total intensity is
2
sin*(Mat/T.
I(t) ор = oe tT) (2.6-15)
sin? (rt/ Tr)

As illustrated in Fig. 2.6-3, the intensity [(¢) is a periodic sequence of optical pulses
with period Тр, peak intensity М? Го, and mean intensity Г = M J). The peak intensity
is therefore М times greater than the mean intensity. The duration of each pulse is
approximately T/M so that the pulses become very short when М is large. If vp =
1 GHz, for example, then Tr = 1 ns; for М = 1000, pulses of 1-ps duration are
generated.

76 CHAPTER2 WAVE OPTICS
I(t)
м bt m ни
12..М
1
KA aN. AN Lal 72.9”. 92 С»
от t и и
M
Figure 2.6-3 Time dependence of the optical intensity I(t) of a polychromatic wave comprising
М monochromatic waves of equal intensities, equal phases, and successive frequencies that differ
by vp. The intensity I(t) is a periodic train of pulses of period Тр = 1/vp with a peak that is М
times greater than the mean J. The duration of each pulse is М times shorter than the period. In this
example M = 5. These graphs should be compared with those in Fig. 2.5-7. The magnitude of the
Fourier transform |V (v)| is shown in the lower graph.
This example provides a dramatic demonstration of how М monochromatic waves can
conspire to produce a train of very short optical pulses. We shall see in Sec. 16.4D that
the modes of a laser can be mode-locked in the fashion described above to produce a
sequence of ultrashort laser pulses.
READING LIST
Wave Optics and Interferometry
See also the reading list on general optics in Chapter 1.
D. Fleisch and L. Kinnaman, A Student’s Guide to Waves, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
M. Mansuripur, Classical Optics and Its Applications, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2009.
P. Hariharan, Basics of Interferometry, Academic Press, 2nd ed. 2006.
J. В. Pierce, Almost All About Waves, MIT Press, 1974; Dover, reissued 2006.
H. J. Pain, The Physics of Vibrations and Waves, Wiley, 6th ed. 2005.
R. H. Webb, Elementary Wave Optics, Academic Press, 1969; Dover, reissued 2005.
E. Hecht and A. Zajac, Optics, Addison—Wesley, 2nd ed. 1990.
7. М. Vaughan, The Fabry—Perot Interferometer, CRC Press, 1989.
H. D. Young, Fundamentals of Waves, Optics, and Modern Physics, McGraw-Hill, paperback 2nd
ed. 1976.
M. Frangon, N. Krauzman, J. P. Matieu, and M. May, Experiments in Physical Optics, CRC Press,
1970.
М. Егапсоп, Optical Interferometry, Academic Press, 1966.
Spectroscopy
р. L. Рама, G. M. Lampman, G. $. Kriz and J. A. Vyvyan, Introduction to Spectroscopy, Brooks/Cole,
5th ed. 2014.
В. С. Smith, Fundamentals of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy, CRC Press/Taylor & Fran-
cis, 2nd ed. 2011.
J. М. Hollas, Modern Spectroscopy, Wiley, paperback 4th ed. 2010.
P. R. Griffiths and J. A. de Haseth, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2007.
Diffraction Gratings
C. Palmer, Diffraction Grating Handbook, Richardson Gratings (Rochester, NY), 7th ed. 2014.
E. G. Loewen and E. Popov, Diffraction Gratings and Applications, CRC Press, 1997.

PROBLEMS 77

Interferometry for Gravitational-Wave Detection

$. Wills, Gravitational Waves: The Road Ahead, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 44—51,
2018.

B. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration), GW170817: Observation
of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Neutron Star Inspiral, Physical Review Letters, vol. 119,
161101, 2017.

В. P. Abbott et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration), Observation of Grav-
itational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger, Physical Review Letters, vol. 116, 061102,
2016.

В. P. Abbott et al., Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, vol. 818, L22, 2016.

К. W. P. Drever, Fabry-Perot Cavity Gravity-Wave Detectors, in О. С. Blair, ed., The Detection of
Gravitational Waves, Cambridge University Press, 1991, Chapter 12, pp. 306-328.

A. Brillet, J. Gea-Banacloche, G. Leuchs, C. N. Man, and J. Y. Vinet, Advanced Techniques: Re-
cycling and Squeezing, in D. G. Blair, ed., The Detection of Gravitational Waves, Cambridge
University Press, 1991, Chapter 15, pp. 369-405.

D. G. Blair, Gravitational Waves in General Relativity, in D. G. Blair, ed., The Detection of Gravita-
tional Waves, Cambridge University Press, 1991, Chapter 1, pp. 3-15.

A. Einstein, Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation (The Field Equations of Gravitation), Sitzungs-
berichte der KGniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin), pp. 844—847 (part 2),
1915.

Popular and Historical

P. Daukantas, 200 Years of Fresnel’s Legacy, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 40-47,
2015.

T. Levitt, A Short Bright Flash: Augustin Fresnel and the Birth of the Modern Lighthouse, Norton,
2013.

Е. J. Dijksterhuis, Lenses and Waves: Christiaan Huygens and the Mathematical Science of Optics in
the Seventeenth Century, 2004, Springer-Verlag, paperback ed. 2011.

J. Z. Buchwald, The Rise of the Wave Theory of Light: Optical Theory and Experiment т the Early
Nineteenth Century, University of Chicago Press, paperback ed. 1989.

W. E. Kock, Sound Waves and Light Waves: The Fundamentals of Wave Motion, Doubleday/Anchor,
1965.

C. Huygens, Treatise on Light, 1690, University of Chicago Press, 1945; Echo Library, reprinted
2007.

Seminal Articles

G. W. Kamerman, ed., Selected Papers on Laser Radar, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 133), 1997.

P. Hariharan and D. Malacara-Hernandez, eds., Selected Papers on Interference, Interferometry, and
Interferometric Metrology, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 110), 1995.

D. Maystre, ed., Selected Papers on Diffraction Gratings, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 83), 1993.

P. Hariharan, ed., Selected Papers on Interferometry, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 28), 1991.

PROBLEMS
2.2-3 Spherical Waves. Use a spherical coordinate system to verify that the complex amplitude of
the spherical wave (2.2-15) satisfies the Helmholtz equation (2.2-7).
2.2-4 Intensity of a Spherical Wave. Derive an expression for the intensity Г of a spherical wave
at a distance г from its center in terms of the optical power P. What is the intensity at r = 1m
for P= 100 М?

78 CHAPTER 2 WAVE OPTICS

2.2-5 Cylindrical Waves. Derive expressions for the complex amplitude and intensity of a
monochromatic wave whose wavefronts are cylinders centered about the y axis.

2.2-6 Paraxial Helmholtz Equation. Derive the paraxial Helmholtz equation (2.2-23) using the
approximations in (2.2-21) and (2.2-22).

2.2-7 Conjugate Waves. Compare a monochromatic wave with complex amplitude U(r) to a
monochromatic wave of the same frequency but with complex amplitude U*(r), with respect
to intensity, wavefronts, and wavefront normals. Use the plane wave U(r) = Aexp[—jk(a+
y)/2] and the spherical wave U(r) = (A/r) exp(—jkr) as examples.

2.3-1 Wave in a GRIN Slab. Sketch the wavefronts of a wave traveling in the graded-index SELFOC
slab described in Example 1.3-1.

2.4-7 Reflection of a Spherical Wave from a Planar Mirror. A spherical wave is reflected from
a planar mirror sufficiently far from the wave origin so that the Fresnel approximation is sat-
isfied. By regarding the spherical wave locally as a plane wave with slowly varying direction,
use the law of reflection of plane waves to determine the nature of the reflected wave.

2.4-8 Optical Pathlength. A plane wave travels in a direction normal to a thin plate made of
N thin parallel layers of thicknesses d, and refractive indices ng, а = 1,2,..., №. If all
reflections are ignored, determine the complex amplitude transmittance of the plate. If the
plate is replaced with a distance d of free space, what should d be so that the same complex
amplitude transmittance is obtained? Show that this distance is the optical pathlength defined
in Sec. 1.1.

2.4-9 Diffraction Grating. Repeat Exercise 2.4-5 for a thin transparent plate whose thickness
d(x, у) is a square (instead of sinusoidal) periodic function of x of period A >> Л. Show
that the angle 0 between the diffracted waves is still given by 9 = X/A. If a plane wave
is incident in a direction normal to the grating, determine the amplitudes of the different
diffracted plane waves.

2.4-10 Reflectance of a Spherical Mirror. Show that the complex amplitude reflectance r(x, у)
(the ratio of the complex amplitudes of the reflected and incident waves) of a thin spherical
mirror of radius R is given by r(x, у) = ho exp[—jko(x? + y?)/R], where ho is a constant.
Compare this to the complex amplitude transmittance of a lens of focal length f = —R/2.

2.5-4 Standing Waves. Derive an expression for the intensity J of the superposition of two plane
waves of wavelength А traveling in opposite directions along the z axis. Sketch I versus 2.

2.5-5 Fringe Visibility. The visibility of an interference pattern such as that described by (2.5-4)
and plotted in Fig. 2.5-1 is defined as the ratio У = (Imax — Imin)/(Imax + min), where
Imax and Ги are the maximum and minimum values of Г. Derive an expression for V as
a function of the ratio I, / 15 of the two interfering waves and determine the ratio I, /I2 for
which the visibility is maximum.

2.5-6 Michelson Interferometer. If one of the mirrors of the Michelson interferometer [Fig. 2.5-
3(b)] is misaligned by a small angle ДО, describe the shape of the interference pattern in the
detector plane. What happens to this pattern as the other mirror moves?

2.6-2 Pulsed Spherical Wave.

(a) Show that a pulsed spherical wave has a complex wavefunction of the form U(r,t) =
(1/r)a(t — r/c), where a(t) is an arbitrary function.

(b) An ultrashort optical pulse has a complex wavefunction with central frequency corre-
sponding to a wavelength A, = 585 nm and a Gaussian envelope of RMS width of
о; = 6 fs (1 fs= 10" s). How many optical cycles are contained within the pulse
width? If the pulse propagates in free space as a spherical wave initiated at the origin at
t = 0, describe the spatial distribution of the intensity as a function of the radial distance
at time t = 1 ps.

CHAPTER
ee
3.1 THE GAUSSIAN BEAM 80

A. Complex Amplitude

B. Properties

C. Beam Quality
3.2 TRANSMISSION THROUGH OPTICAL COMPONENTS 91

A. Transmission Through a Thin Lens

B. Beam Shaping

C. Reflection from a Spherical Mirror

*D. Transmission Through an Arbitrary Optical System
3.3  HERMITE—GAUSSIAN BEAMS 99
3.4 LAGUERRE-—GAUSSIAN BEAMS 102
3.5 NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS 105

A. Bessel Beams

*B. Airy Beams

‘ we =- \ ~ a 7 4
The Gaussian beam, named af- Edmond Nicolas Laguerre’ Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel
ter the German mathematician (1834-1886), a French math- (1784-1846), a noted German
Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777- етайслап, devised a set of astronomer, established a set of
1855), is circularly symmetric polynomials useful for describ- functions that characterize the
and has a radial intensity that ing circularly symmetric light radial intensity of circularly
follows the form of a Gaussian beams with helical wavefronts symmetric, planar-wavefront,
distribution. and orbital angularmomentum. _non-diffracting optical beams.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa Е. A. Saleh and Malvin Сай Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
79

CSC
Can light be spatially confined and transported in free space without angular spread?
Although the wave nature of light precludes the possibility of such idealized transport,
light can, in fact, be confined in the form of beams that come as close as possible to
waves that are spatially localized and nondiverging.

The two extremes of angular and spatial confinement are the plane wave and the
spherical wave, respectively. The wavefront normals (rays) of a plane wave coincide
with the direction of travel of the wave so that there is no angular spread, but its energy
extends spatially over all space. The spherical wave, in contrast, originates from a
single spatial point, but its wavefront normals (rays) diverge in all angular directions.

Waves whose wavefront normals make small angles with the z axis are called parax-
ial waves. They must satisfy the paraxial Helmholtz equation, which was derived in
Sec. 2.2C. The Gaussian beam is an important solution of this equation that exhibits
the characteristics of an optical beam, as attested to by a number of its properties.
The beam power is principally concentrated within a small cylinder that surrounds the
beam axis. The intensity distribution in any transverse plane is a circularly symmetric
Gaussian function centered about the beam axis. The width of this function is mini-
mum at the beam waist and gradually becomes larger as the distance from the waist
increases in both directions. The wavefronts are approximately planar near the beam
waist, then gradually curve as the distance from the waist increases, and ultimately
become approximately spherical far from the beam waist. The angular divergence of
the wavefront normals assumes the minimum value permitted by the wave equation for
a given beam width. The wavefront normals are therefore much like a thin pencil of
rays. Under ideal conditions, the light from many types of lasers takes the form of a
Gaussian beam.

This Chapter
An expression for the complex amplitude of the Gaussian beam is set forth in Sec. 3.1
and a detailed discussion of its physical properties (intensity, power, beam width,
beam divergence, depth of focus, and phase) is provided. The shaping of Gaussian
beams (focusing, relaying, collimating, and expanding) via the use of various optical
components is the subject of Sec. 3.2. In Secs. 3.3 and 3.4 we introduce more general
families of optical beams, known as Hermite—Gaussian and Laguerre—Gaussian beams,
respectively, of which the simple Gaussian beam is a member. Finally, in Sec. 3.5 we
discuss nondiffracting beams, including Bessel, Bessel-Gaussian, and Airy beams.
3.1 THE GAUSSIAN BEAM

A. Complex Amplitude
The concept of paraxial waves was introduced in Sec. 2.2C. A monochromatic paraxial
wave is a plane wave traveling along the z direction e~/** (with wavenumber k =
2п/Л and wavelength Л), modulated by a complex envelope A(r) that is a slowly
varying function of position (see Fig. 2.2-5), so that its complex amplitude is

U(r) = A(r) exp(—jkz). (3.1-1)
The envelope is taken to be approximately constant within а neighborhood of size А, so
that the wave locally maintains its plane-wave nature but exhibits wavefront normals
that are paraxial rays.
80

3.1 THE GAUSSIAN BEAM 81

In order that the complex amplitude U(r) satisfy the Helmholtz equation, V?U +
k?U = 0, the complex envelope A(r) must satisfy the paraxial Helmholtz equa-
tion (2.2-23)

OA
V2.A — 7 2k— =0, 3.1-2
TA jek (3.1-2)
where V2. = 0? /0x? + 0? /ду? is the transverse Laplacian operator. A simple solution
to the paraxial Helmholtz equation yields the paraboloidal wave (see Exercise 2.2-2),
for which
A 2
A(r) = = exp(—ikE) ‚5 paw ty’, (3.1-3)
z 22
where Aj is a constant. The paraboloidal wave is the paraxial approximation of the
spherical wave U(r) = (A, /r) exp(—jkr) when 5 and у are much smaller than 2 (see
Sec. 2.2B).

Another solution of the paraxial Helmholtz equation leads to the Gaussian beam.
It is obtained from the paraboloidal wave by use of a simple transformation. Since
the complex envelope of the paraboloidal wave (3.1-3) is a solution of the paraxial
Helmholtz equation (3.1-2), so too is a shifted version of it, with z — € replacing z
where € is a constant:

A(r) = he ik и (z)=2-€ (3.1-4)
= —~ exp|—-j7k — |, 08) = 2 с. .1-
q(z) 2q(z)
This represents a paraboloidal wave centered about the point z = € instead of about
z = 0. Equation (3.1-4) remains a solution of (3.1-2) even when € is complex, but
the solution acquires dramatically different properties. In particular, when € is purely
imaginary, say & = —720 where 20 is real, (3.1-4) yields the complex envelope of the
Gaussian beam
A ор
A(r) = a exp is] ‚ q(z) = + 120. (3.1-5)
q(z) 2q(z) Complex
Envelope
The quantity q(z) is called the q-parameter of the beam and the parameter 20 is known
as the Rayleigh range.

To separate the amplitude and phase of this complex envelope, we write the complex
function 1/q(z) = 1/(2- 720) in terms of its real and imaginary parts by defining two
new real functions, R(z) and W(z), such that

1 1 А
а, 3.1-6
< Re) тт) ore)
It will be shown subsequently that W(z) and R(z) are measures of the beam width
and wavefront radius of curvature, respectively. Expressions for W(z) and R(z) as
functions of z and 20 are provided in (3.1-8) and (3.1-9). Substituting (3.1-6) into (3.1-
5) and using (3.1-1) leads directly to an expression for the complex amplitude U(r) of

82 CHAPTER3 BEAMOPTICS
the Gaussian beam:
U(r) = Ад exp | exp |—jkz — jk——— + j¢(z) (3.1-7)
И’ (=) И”? (=) 2R(z) Complex
Amplitude
2\2
И’ (=) =Wo4/1t+ (=) (3.1-8)
20
#0 2
R(z)=2|1+ (2) (3.1-9)
z
-_1 #
¢(z) = tan7* — (3.1-10)
20
А
Wo = 1/2. (3.1-11)
п Beam Parameters
A new constant Ао = А+ /72о has been defined for convenience.

The expression for the complex amplitude of the Gaussian beam provided above is
central to this chapter. It is described by two independent parameters, Ag and zo, which
are determined from the boundary conditions. All other parameters are related to the
20 and the wavelength Л by (3.1-8) to (3.1-11). The significance of these parameters
will become clear in the sequel.

B. Properties
Equations (3.1-7)-(3.1-11) will now be used to determine the properties of the Gaus-
sian beam.
Intensity
The optical intensity I(r) = |U(r)|? is a function of the axial and radial positions, z
and р = \/x? + y?, respectively
Wo 2 2р?
Кр, =) =Ю|— —-—— |, 3.1-12
А owas G.1-12)
where Jp = |Ao|?. At any value of z the intensity is a Gaussian function of the
radial distance р — hence the appellation “Gaussian beam.” The Gaussian function
has its peak on the z axis, at р = 0, and decreases monotonically as р increases. The
beam width W(z) of the Gaussian distribution increases with the axial distance z as
illustrated in Fig. 3.1-1.
On the beam axis (р = 0) the intensity in (3.1-12) reduces to
1(0,2) = b | M2] Lo (3.1-13)
Г V+ (2/20)?

3.1. THE GAUSSIANBEAM 83
И И И
(а) (Б) (с)
ом x 0 W х ом х
Figure 3.1-1 Normalized Gaussian beam intensity I/Jp аз a function of the radial distance р at
different axial distances: (a) z = 0; (6) 2 = 203 (©) z = 22.
which has its maximum value Jp at z = O and decays gradually with increasing z,
reaching half its peak value at z = +29 (Fig. 3.1-2). When |z| >> 2, [(0,z) =
Ioz/z?, so that the intensity decreases with distance in accordance with an inverse-
square law, as for spherical and paraboloidal waves. Overall, the beam center (z =
0, р = 0) is the location of the greatest intensity: 1(0,0) = Ip.
I/Ip
1
_* | [I
—Z%o 0 50 <
Figure 3.1-2 The normalized beam intensity [/J, at points on the beam axis (р = 0) as a function
of distance along the beam axis, z.
Power
The total optical power carried by the beam is the integral of the optical intensity over
any transverse plane (say at position 2),
со
p= | Гр, =) 2прар, (3.1-14)
0
which yields
P= 5 1p (ли?) . (3.1-15)
The beam power is thus half the peak intensity multiplied by the beam area. The result
is independent of z, as expected. Since optical beams are often described by their power

84 CHAPTER3 BEAMOPTICS
P, it is useful to express Го in terms of P via (3.1-15), whereupon (3.1-12) can be
rewritten in the form
Кр. =) = —2Р 2p" | (3.1-16)
p, 2) = == ехр| = | - .1-
пи! (=) И/? (=) Beam Intensity
The ratio of the power carried within a circle of radius ро in the transverse plane to
the total power, at position z, is
=f a )2npdp=1 7% (3.1-17)
— Zz = 1-exp|-—— |. .1-
The power contained within а circle of radius ро = И’ (=) is therefore approximately
86% of the total power. About 99% of the power is contained within a circle of radius
Beam Width
At any transverse plane, the beam intensity assumes its peak value on the beam axis,
and decreases by the factor 1/e? = 0.135 at the radial distance р = W(z). Since 86%
of the power is carried within a circle of radius W(z), we regard W(z) as the beam
radius (or beam width). The RMS width of the intensity distribution, on the other hand,
iso = 5W(z) (see Appendix A, Sec. A.2, for the different definitions of width).
The dependence of the beam width on z is governed by (3.1-8),
2\2
W(z) =Wo4/1+ (=) . (3.1-18)
20 Beam Width
(Beam Radius)
It assumes its minimum value, Wo, at the plane z = 0. This is the beam waist and
W is thus known as the waist radius. The waist diameter 2W, is also called the spot
size. The beam width increases monotonically with z, and assumes the value J/2Wo at
z= +2 (Fig. 3.1-3).
SL Wel —
<= Wo —
Ги
329 —250 —Z0 0 50 250 350 <
Figure 3.1-3 The beam width W(z) assumes its minimum value Wo at the beam waist (2 = 0),
reaches J/2Wo at z = +29, and increases linearly with z for large 2.

3.1. THEGAUSSIANBEAM 85
Beam Divergence
For z >> 20 the first term of (3.1-18) may be neglected, which results in the linear
relation
WwW
И (=) = —22 = Oz. (3.1-19)
20
As illustrated in Fig. 3.1-3, the beam then diverges as а cone of half-angle
Wo А
90 = — = — 3.1-20
0 2 пи ’ ( )
where we have made use of (3.1-11). Approximately 86% of the beam power is соп-
fined within this cone, as indicated following (3.1-17).
Rewriting (3.1-20) in terms of the spot size, the angular divergence of the beam
becomes
4 Л
209 = — ——. (3.1-21)
п 2Wo Divergence Angle
The divergence angle is directly proportional to the wavelength Л and inversely propor-
tional to the spot size 2Wo. Squeezing the spot size (beam-waist diameter) therefore
leads to increased beam divergence. It is clear that a highly directional beam is con-
structed by making use of a short wavelength and a thick beam waist.
Depth of Focus
Since the beam has its minimum width at z = 0, as shown in Fig. 3.1-3, it achieves
its best focus at the plane z = 0. In either direction, the beam gradually grows “out
of focus.” The axial distance within which the beam width is no greater than a factor
,/2 times its minimum value, so that its area is within a factor of 2 of the minimum,
is known as the depth-of-focus or confocal parameter (Fig. 3.1-4). It is evident from
(3.1-18) and (3.1-11) that the actual depth of focus is twice the Rayleigh range:
2nWG
2 = 0. (3.1-22)
А Depth of Focus
wwe te Wo
2% — о 250 <
Е и А 2 А
Figure 3.1-4 Depth of focus of a Gaussian beam.
The depth of focus is therefore directly proportional to the area of the beam at its
waist, tW, and inversely proportional to the wavelength, Л. A beam focused to a

86 CHAPTER3 BEAMOPTICS
small spot size thus has a short depth of focus; locating the plane of focus thus requires
increased accuracy. Small spot size and long depth of focus can be simultaneously
attained only for short wavelengths. As an example, at А. = 633 nm (a common Не-
Ne laser-line wavelength), a spot size 2Wo = 2 cm corresponds to a depth of focus
220 © 1 Кт. A much smaller spot size of 20 wm corresponds to a much shorter depth
of focus of 1 mm.
Phase
The phase of the Gaussian beam is, from (3.1-7),!
(0,2) = ke —6(2) + Ae (3.1-23)
z)=kz-C(z) + ——. .1-
ф\р, IR)
On the beam axis (p = 0) the phase comprises two components:
p(0, z) = kz —¢(z). (3.1-24)
The first, kz, is the phase of a plane wave. The second represents a phase retardation
¢(z) given by (3.1-10), which ranges from —1/2 at z = —co to +л/2 at z = со,
as illustrated in Fig. 3.1-5. This phase retardation corresponds to an excess delay of
the wavefront in relation to a plane wave (see also Fig. 3.1-8). The total accumulated
excess retardation as the wave travels from z = —oo to z = oo is 7. This phenomenon
is known as the Gouy effect. It arises from the transverse spatial confinement of the
beam, which is accompanied by a spread in its transverse wavevector components by
virtue of the Fourier transform. This results in a reduction in the axial component of
the wavevector k, from its plane-wave value К, = ,/k? — № — k? (see Sec. 2.2B).*
G2)
TQ -------------------------------
~3% 2% <q 0 20 220 320 >
—п/4
1--------------------------- 52
Figure 3.1-5 The function ¢(z) represents the phase retardation of the Gaussian beam relative to
a uniform plane wave at points on the beam axis.
Wavefronts
The third component in (3.1-23) is responsible for wavefront bending. It represents the
deviation of the phase at off-axis points in a given transverse plane from that at the axial
point. The surfaces of constant phase satisfy k[z + p?/2R(z)] — ¢(z) = 214. Since
¢(z) and R(z) are relatively slowly varying functions, they are effectively constant at
points within the beam width on each wavefront. We may therefore write = + p?/2R =
ЧА + CA/2n, where В = R(z) and ¢ = ¢(z). This is the equation of a paraboloidal
surface with radius of curvature R. Thus, R(z), plotted in Fig. 3.1-6, is the radius of
curvature of the wavefront at position z along the beam axis.
1 The phase ф(р, =) in (3.1-23), and throughout this chapter, is related to the phase factor specified in (3.1-7)
by exp(—Jy).
* See 5. Feng and H. С. Winful, Physical Origin of the Gouy Phase Shift, Optics Letters, vol. 26, рр. 485—487,
2001.

3.4 THE GAUSSIAN BEAM 87
Ко -
250 о
—3% —2% gen о 50 250 350 <
ее
Figure 3.1-6 The radius of curvature R(z) of the wavefronts of a Gaussian beam as a function of
position along the beam axis. The dashed line is the radius of curvature of a spherical wave.
2% —50 0 | 50 2% <
Figure 3.1-7 Wavefronts of a Gaussian beam.

As illustrated in Fig. 3.1-6, the radius of curvature R(z) is infinite at z = 0, so
that the wavefronts are planar, 1.е., they have no curvature. The radius decreases to
a minimum value of 220 at z = zo, where the wavefront has the greatest curvature
(Fig. 3.1-7). The radius of curvature subsequently increases as z increases further until
R(z) = z for z >> 2. The wavefronts are then approximately the same as those of a
spherical wave. The pattern of the wavefronts is identical for negative z, except for a
change in sign (Fig. 3.1-8). We have adopted the convention that a diverging wavefront
has a positive radius of curvature whereas a converging wavefront has a negative radius
of curvature.

(a) TMI
PiEEEELLLEL PEEL LEEE GG Figure 3.1-8 Wavefronts of (a) a uniform
| t | и LAN № \: | plane wave; (5) a spherical wave; (с) а Gaus-
Wali: ИАА ААА sian beam. At points near the beam center,

(b) ТИТ: им || the Gaussian beam resembles а plane wave.
Аааа: МЕРИ FERRE RRR 2 At large z the beam behaves like a spherical
AAAS RAE wave except that its phase is retarded by
РАМ РЕ РИМ АЙ: п/2 (a quarter of the distance between two

88 CHAPTER3 BEAMOPTICS

Parameters Required to Characterize a Gaussian Beam

Assuming that the wavelength Л is known, how many parameters are required to
describe a plane wave, a spherical wave, and a Gaussian beam? The plane wave is
completely specified by its complex amplitude and direction. The spherical wave is
specified by its complex amplitude and the location of its origin. The Gaussian beam,
in contrast, requires more parameters for its characterization — its peak amplitude
[determined by Ао in (3.1-7)], its direction (the beam axis), the location of its waist,
and one additional parameter, such as the waist radius Wo or the Rayleigh range 2p.
Thus, if the beam peak amplitude and the axis are known, two additional parameters
are required for full specification.

If the complex g-parameter, 4(2) = z + 720, is known, the distance to the beam
waist 2 and the Rayleigh range zo are readily identified as the real and imaginary parts
thereof. As an example, if g(z) is 3 + 14 cm at some point on the beam axis, we infer
that the beam waist lies at a distance z = 3cm to the left of that point and that the depth
of focus is 220 = 8 cm. The waist radius Wp may then be determined via (3.1-11). The
quantity q(z) is therefore sufficient for characterizing a Gaussian beam of known peak
amplitude and beam axis. Given q(z) at a single point, the linear dependence of 4 on
= permits it to be determined at all points: if g(z) = q and q(z + а) = q, then
42 = q + а. Using the example provided immediately above, at z = 13 cm it is
evident that = 13 + 74.

If the beam width W (2) and the radius of curvature R(z) are known at an arbitrary
point on the beam axis, the beam can be fully identified by solving (3.1-8), (3.1-9), and
(3.1-11) for z, 20, and Wo. Alternatively, the beam can be identified by determining
q(z) from W(z) and R(z) using (3.1-6).

Summary: Properties of the Gaussian Beam at Special Locations

и At the location z = 20. At an axial distance zp from the beam waist, the wave

has the following properties:
— The intensity on the beam axis is 5 the peak intensity.
— The beam width is a factor of /2 greater than the width at the beam waist,
and the beam area is larger by a factor of 2.
— The phase on the beam axis is retarded by an angle 7/4 relative to the
phase of a plane wave.
— The radius of curvature of the wavefront achieves its minimum value, R =
220, So that the wavefront has the greatest curvature.
= Near the beam center. At locations for which |z| < z and p < Wo, the
quantity exp[—p?/W?(z)] = exp(—p?/W@) = 1, so that the beam intensity,
which is proportional to the square of this quantity, is approximately constant.
Also, R(z) = 20/2 and ¢(z) = 0, so that the phase k[z + p?/2R(z)| = kz(1+
02/225) = kz, by virtue of (3.1-11) when zp >> А. The Gaussian beam may
therefore be approximated near its center by a plane wave.

= Far from the beam waist. At transverse locations within the waist radius (р <

Wo), but far from the beam waist (z >> 20), the wave behaves approximately
like a spherical wave. In this domain W(z) = Woz/zo >» Wo and р < Wo, so
that exp[—p?/W?(z)] = 1 and the beam intensity is approximately uniform.
Since R(z) = z in this regime, the wavefronts are approximately spherical.
Thus, except for the Gouy phase retardation ¢(z) = 7/2, the complex ampli-
tude of the Gaussian beam approaches that of the paraboloidal wave, which in
turn approaches that of the spherical wave in the paraxial approximation.

3.1 THE GAUSSIAN BEAM 89
ee
EXERCISE 3.1-1
Parameters of a Gaussian Laser Beam. A 1-mW He-Ne laser produces a Gaussian beam at
a wavelength of Л = 633 nm with a spot size 2И = 0.1 mm.

(a) Determine the angular divergence of the beam, its depth of focus, and its diameter at z = 3.5 x
10° km (approximately the distance to the moon).

(b) What is the radius of curvature of the wavefront at z = 0, z = zp, and 2 = 220?

(c) What is the optical intensity (in W/cm?) at the beam center (z = 0, p = 0) and at the axial point
Zz = 2? Compare this with the intensity at z = z of a 100-W spherical wave produced by a
small isotropically emitting light source located at z = 0.

EXERCISE 3.1-2

Validity of the Paraxial Approximation for a Gaussian Beam. The complex envelope

A(r) of a Gaussian beam is an exact solution of the paraxial Helmholtz equation (3.1-2), but its

corresponding complex amplitude U(r) = A(r) exp(—jkz) is only an approximate solution of the

Helmholtz equation (2.2-7). This is because the paraxial Helmholtz equation is itself approximate.

The approximation is satisfactory if the condition (2.2-21) is satisfied. Show that if the divergence

angle бо of a Gaussian beam is small (89 < 1), the necessary condition (2.2-21) for the validity of

the paraxial Helmholtz equation is indeed satisfied.

EXERCISE 3.1-3

Determination of a Beam with Given Width and Curvature. Consider a Gaussian beam

whose width W and radius of curvature R are known at a particular point on the beam axis (Fig. 3.1-

9). Show that the beam waist is located to the left at a distance

R
= —__—__; 3.1-25
"> 1+ ВИ’ (3.1-25)
and that the waist radius is
И’
Wo = мА. (3.1-26)
ИТ (пИ’2/лВ)?
woe и
Wo .
R Figure 3.1-9 Given W and R, determine z and
о _ У .

|}:

EXERCISE 3.1-4

Determination of the Width and Curvature at One Point Given the Width and Curva-

ture at Another Point. Assume that the width and radius of curvature of a Gaussian beam of

wavelength Л = 1 jum at some point on the beam axis are W; = 1 mm and А: = 1 m, respectively

(Fig. 3.1-10). Determine the beam width W2 and radius of curvature В> at a distance d = 10 cm to

the right.

ween У! W2

Ri Ro Figure 3.1-10 Given Wj, R, and а, determine
ae И” and Ro.
a:

90 CHAPTERS BEAM OPTICS
EXERCISE 3.1-5
Identification of a Beam with Known Curvatures at Two Points. A Gaussian beam has
radii of curvature R, and А at two points on the beam axis separated by a distance d, as illustrated
in Fig. 3.1-11. Verify that the location of the beam center and its depth of focus may be determined
from the relations
_ —d(R2—d)
я = В ~ 2d (3.1-27)
—d(Ri + а) (1 — d)(R2 — Ri — d)
2 nee лоС ВНЕ ИНЫЕ 3.1-28
*0 (Ry — В, — 2d)2 (3.1-28)
Wy = (22.
п
£2 Я
=— 51 weet
1 Ro Figure 3.1-11 Given Вл, В», and а, determine
i ee 21, 22, 20, and Wo.

a
НИ
С. Beam Quality
The Gaussian beam is an idealization that is only approximately met, even in well-
designed laser systems. A measure of the quality of an optical beam is the deviation
of its profile from Gaussian form. For a beam of waist diameter 2W,,, and angular
divergence 20, a useful numerical measure of the beam quality is provided by the M?-
factor, which is defined as the ratio of the waist-diameter—divergence product, 2W,,, -
20m (usually measured in units of mm-mrad), to that expected for a Gaussian beam,
which is 2Wp - 209 = 4A/7. Thus,

2Wm . 20
МЕ. 3.1-29
А4А/п ( )
If the two beams have the same waist diameter, the M?-factor is simply the ratio of
their angular divergences,

М? = 6/80, (3.1-30)
where 09 = A/tWo = A/TW yy, [see (3.1-21)]. Since the Gaussian beam enjoys the
smallest possible divergence angle of all beams with the same waist diameter, М? > 1.
The specification of the M?-factor of an optical beam thus signifies a divergence angle
that is M? times greater than that of a Gaussian beam of the same waist diameter.

Optical beams produced by commonly available Helium—Neon lasers usually ex-
hibit M? < 1.1. For ion lasers, М? is typically in the range 1.1-1.3. Collimated
TEM po diode-laser beams usually exhibit М? ~1.1-1.7, whereas high-energy mul-
timode lasers display М? factors as high as 3 or 4.

For an optical beam that is approximately Gaussian, the M?-factor may be de-
termined by making use of a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera to measure the

3.2 TRANSMISSION THROUGH OPTICAL COMPONENTS 91
intensity profile of the beam at various locations along the axis of the beam. The beam
is focused, by a high-quality lens with a long focal length and large Ру, to a size that
is roughly the same as that of the CCD array [see (3.2-17)]. First, the beam center is
located by finding the plane at which the spot size is minimized; the waist diameter
2W,» is then measured. The axial distance from the beam center to the plane at which
the beam diameter increases by a factor of \/2 provides the Rayleigh range z,,. An
estimate of the angular divergence 26,, is obtained by using the Gaussian-beam relation
Om = \/А/п2т, Which is obtained from (3.1-11) and (3.1-20). Finally, the M?-factor
is computed by means of (3.1-29).

3.2 TRANSMISSION THROUGH OPTICAL COMPONENTS
We proceed now to a discussion of the effects of various optical components on a
Gaussian beam. We demonstrate that if a Gaussian beam is transmitted through a set
of circularly symmetric optical components aligned with the beam axis, the Gaussian
beam remains a Gaussian beam, provided that the overall system maintains the parax-
ial nature of the wave. The beam is reshaped, however — its waist and curvature are
altered. The results of this section are of importance in the design of optical instruments
that rely on Gaussian beams.
A. Transmission Through a Thin Lens
The complex amplitude transmittance of a thin lens of focal length f is proportional
to exp(jkp? /2f) [see (2.4-9)]. When a Gaussian beam traverses such a component,
its complex amplitude, given in (3.1-7), is multiplied by this phase factor. As a result,
although the beam width is not altered (W’ = W), the wavefront is.

To be specific consider a Gaussian beam centered at z = 0, with waist radius Wo,
transmitted through a thin lens located at position z, as illustrated in Fig. 3.2-1. The
phase of the incident wave at the plane of the lens is kz + Кр? /2В — С, as prescribed by
(3.1-23), where В = R(z) and ¢ = ¢(z) are given in (3.1-9) and (3.1-10), respectively.
The phase of the emerging wave therefore becomes

2 2 2
р p р
КА СК = А+ — 3.2-1
ВС Bop = 6 3.25
where
1 1 1
Sei tL 3.2-2
RR т (3.2-2)
We conclude that the transmitted wave is itself a Gaussian beam with width W’ = W
and radius of curvature В’, where А’ satisfies the imaging equation 1/R—1/R’ = 1/f.
The sign of F is positive since the wavefront of the incident beam is diverging whereas
the opposite is true of А’.

The parameters of the emerging beam are determined by referring to the outcome
of Exercise 3.1-3, in which the parameters of a Gaussian beam are determined from its
width and curvature at a given point. Equation (3.1-26) provides that the waist radius
is

WwW
И = РА (3.2-3)
1+ (nW2/AR')?

92  CHAPTER3 BEAMOPTICS
Ses. nae 9 R R' ~~~. el 9%
==> << >| S855 eT ch = Sea
Figure 3.2-1 Transmission of a Gaussian beam through a thin lens.
whereas (3.1-25) provides that the beam center is located at a distance from the lens
given by
R’
=. (3.2-4)
1+ (ЛВ’/лИ/?)
The minus sign in (3.2-4) indicates that the beam waist lies to the right of the lens.
Substituting W = Wo./1 + (2/20)? and В = #[1 + (z0/z)?] from (3.1-8) and (3.1-9)
into (3.2-2) to (3.2-4) yields a set of formulas that relate the unprimed parameters of
the Gaussian beam incident on the lens to the primed parameters of the Gaussian beam
that emerges from the lens, as represented in Fig. 3.2-1:
Waist radius Wi = MW (3.2-5)
Waist location (2’ — f) = M?(z—- f) (3.2-6)
Depth of focus 2x = М?(220) (3.2-7)
20
Divergence angle 26), = avd (3.2-8)
Magnification M Mr (3.2-9)
ificatio = —— .2-
6 vl+r?
„— <2 M, = = | . (3.2-9а)
z—f z—f Parameter
Transformation
by a Lens
The magnification factor M evidently plays an important role. The waist radius is
magnified by М, the depth of focus is magnified by М2, and the divergence angle is
minified by М.
Limit of Ray Optics
Consider the limiting case in which (z — }) >> Zo, so that the lens is well outside the
depth of focus of the incident beam (Fig. 3.2-2). The beam may then be approximated
by a spherical wave, and, in accordance with (3.2-9) and (3.2-9a), r < 1 so that
М = М,. In this case (3.2-5)—(3.2-9a) reduce to
Wi = MW (3.2-10)
1 1 1
—+-n-— 3.2-11
z! + 2 f ( )

3.2 TRANSMISSION THROUGH OPTICAL COMPONENTS 93
| Л
М = M, = ——. (3.2-12)
z—f
Equations (3.2-10)—(3.2-12) are precisely the relations provided by ray optics for the
location and size of a patch of light of diameter 2Wp located at a distance z to the left of
a thin lens (see Sec. 1.2C). Indeed, the magnification factor М, is identically that based
on ray optics. Since (3.2-9) provides that М < М, the maximum Gaussian-beam
magnification attainable is the ray-optics limit M,. As r? increases, the magnification
is reduced and the deviation from ray optics widens. Equations (3.2-10)—(3.2-12) also
correspond to the results obtained from wave optics for the focusing of a spherical
wave in the paraxial approximation (see Sec. 2.4B).
и < nd 5 —
а. es Figure 3.2-2 Beam imaging in the
ae == ray-optics limit.
2Wy 2%
В. Beam Shaping
A lens, or sequence of lenses, may be used to reshape a Gaussian beam without
compromising its Gaussian nature. Of course, graded-index components can serve this
purpose as well.
Beam Focusing
For a lens placed at the waist of a Gaussian beam, as illustrated in Fig. 3.2-3, the
appropriate parameter-transformation formulas are obtained by simply substituting
z = 0 in (3.2-5) to (3.2-9a). The transmitted beam is then focused to a waist radius
Wj at a distance =’ given by
Wi
w, = ——*. (3.2-13)
МЕ (20/f)?
р /
=. (3.2-14)
1+ (1/20)?

In the special case when the depth of focus of the incident beam 220 is much longer
than the focal length f of the lens, as illustrated in Fig. 3.2-4, (3.2-13) reduces to
ИМ = (f/20)Wo. Using 20 = tW@/A from (3.1-11), along with (3.1-20), then leads
to the simple result

Win 2p =Oof (3.2-15)
0” TWo о ‘
= {. (3.2-16)

94 CHAPTER3 BEAMOPTICS
2Wo
2%
Figure 3.2-3 Focusing a Gaussian
beam with a lens at the beam waist.
И
The transmitted beam is then focused in the focal plane of the lens as would be expected
for a collimated beam of parallel rays impinging on the lens. This result emerges
because, at its waist, the incident Gaussian beam is well approximated by a plane wave.
Wave optics provides that the focused waist radius Wj is directly proportional to the
wavelength and the focal length, and inversely proportional to the radius of the incident
beam. The spot size expected from ray optics is, of course, zero, a result that is indeed
obtained from the wave-optics formulas as А — 0.
———  %>>f Zs f °
Figure 3.2-4 Focusing а соШ-
mated beam.

In many applications, such as laser scanning, laser printing, compact-disc (CD)
burning, and laser fusion, it is desired to generate the smallest possible spot size. It
is clear from (3.2-15) that this is achieved by making use of the shortest possible
wavelength, the thickest incident beam, and the shortest focal-length lens. Since the
lens must intercept the incident beam, its diameter D should be at least 2Wo. Taking
D = 2W, and making use of (3.2-15), the diameter of the focused spot is given by

i 4 Л
2Wo = —ЛАЕ+ Е» = Бу (3.2-17)
т Focused Spot Size

where the F’-number of the lens is denoted Fy. A microscope objective with small Е-
number is often used for this purpose. A caveat is in order: since (3.2-15) and (3.2-16)
are approximate their validity must always be confirmed before use.
НИ
EXERCISE 3.2-1
Beam Relaying. A Gaussian beam of radius Wo and wavelength Л is repeatedly focused by a
sequence of identical lenses, each of focal length f and separated by a distance d (Fig. 3.2-5). The
focused waist radius is equal to the incident waist radius, 1.е., Wj = Wo. Using (3.2-6), (3.2-9), and
(3.2-9a) show that this condition can arise only if the inequality d < 4f is satisfied. Note that this is
the same as the ray-confinement condition for a sequence of lenses derived in Example 1.4-1 using
ray optics.

3.2 TRANSMISSION THROUGH OPTICAL COMPONENTS 95
kd >|
f
<
Figure 3.2-5 Beam relaying.

EXERCISE 3.2-2

Beam Collimation. А Gaussian beam is transmitted through a thin lens of focal length f.

(a) Show that the locations of the waists of the incident and transmitted beams, z and z’, respectively,
are related by

=’ z/f-1
= -1= — 7: (3.2-18)
f (2/f — 1)? (20/1)?
This relation is plotted in Fig. 3.2-6.
т 7 | 5 =0
\J
2ER\ a 0.25
N
. 0.5
1 1
Figure 3.2-6 Relation between the waist
> =f 1 2 locations of the incident and transmitted
zy beams.
f
С “YR
\
\
\
\
А М
\
\

(b) The beam is collimated by making the location of the new waist z’ as distant as possible from
the lens. This is achieved by using the smallest possible ratio z9/f (short depth of focus and
long focal length). For a given ratio 2о/}, show that the optimal value of = for collimation is
=} + о.

(с) Given А = 1 ум, 20 = 1 см, and f = 50 cm, determine the optimal value of z for collimation,
and the corresponding magnification М, distance z’, and width W{ of the collimated beam.

EXERCISE 3.2-3
Beam Expansion. А Gaussian beam may be expanded and collimated by using two lenses of
focal lengths f, and fo, as illustrated in Fig. 3.2-7. Parameters of the initial beam (Wo, 20) are
modified by the first lens to (ИХ, 20) and subsequently altered by the second lens to (W4, 20). The
first lens, which has a short focal length, serves to reduce the depth of focus 220 of the beam. This
prepares it for collimation by the second lens, which has a long focal length. The system functions as
an inverse Keplerian telescope.

96  CHAPTER3 BEAMOPTICS
Z1kk— 22
24 >| |=
2%
2Wo у:
1 2m
pb
Figure 3.2-7 Beam expansion using a two-lens system.

(a) Assuming that f; < z and z— | >> Zp, use the results of Exercise 3.2-2 to determine the optical
distance d between the lenses such that the distance z’ to the waist of the final beam is as large
as possible.

(b) Determine an expression for the overall magnification М = W/W of the system.

ee

C. Reflection from a Spherical Mirror

We now examine the reflection of a Gaussian beam from a spherical mirror. The

complex amplitude reflectance of the mirror is proportional to exp(—jkp”/R) (see

Prob. 2.4-10), where by convention R > 0 for convex mirrors and R < 0 for concave

mirrors. The action of the mirror on a Gaussian beam of width W, and radius of

curvature Ву is therefore to reflect the beam and to modify its phase by the factor

—kp?/R, while leaving the beam width unaltered. The reflected beam therefore re-

mains Gaussian, with parameters W2 and R2 given by

И = И” (3.2-19)
1 1 2

— =a +35: 3.2-20
Ro В В ( )

Equation (3.2-20) is identical to (3.2-2) provided f = —R/2. Thus, the Gaussian

beam is modified in precisely the same way as it is by a lens, except for a reversal of

the direction of propagation.
Three special cases, illustrated in Fig. 3.2-8, are of interest:
(a) (b) (c)

Figure 3.2-8 Reflection of a Gaussian beam with radius of curvature R, from a mirror with radius

of curvature В: (a) В = co; (6) Ry = ow; (с) В, = —R. The dashed curves show the effects of

replacing the mirror by a lens of focal length f = —R/2.

3.2 TRANSMISSION THROUGH OPTICAL COMPONENTS 97
= If the mirror is planar, 1.е., В = со, then Rg = Rj, so that the mirror reverses the
direction of the beam without altering its curvature, as illustrated in Fig. 3.2-8(a).

a If Ry = сх, ie., if the beam waist lies on the mirror, then Rg = R/2. If the
mirror is concave (В < 0), В < 0 so that the reflected beam acquires a negative
curvature and the wavefronts converge. The mirror then focuses the beam to a
smaller spot size, as illustrated in Fig. 3.2-8(0).

и ГД, = —R, 1.е., if the incident beam has the same curvature as the mirror, then
Ry = R. The wavefronts of both the incident and reflected waves then coincide
with the mirror and the wave retraces its path as shown in Fig. 3.2-8(c). This is
expected since the wavefront normals are also normal to the mirror so that the
mirror reflects the wave back onto itself. In the illustration in Fig. 3.2-8(c) the
mirror is concave (В < 0); the incident wave is diverging (R; > 0) and the
reflected wave is converging (> < 0).

a
EXERCISE 3.2-4
Variable-Reflectance Mirrors. A spherical mirror of radius В has a variable power reflectance
characterized by R(p) = |r(p)|? = exp(—2p?/W;2), which is a Gaussian function of the radial
distance р. The reflectance is unity on axis and falls by a factor 1 /е? when р = W,,,. Determine the
effect of the mirror on a Gaussian beam with radius of curvature В1 and beam width W, at the mirror.
eee
*D. Transmission Through an Arbitrary Optical System
In the paraxial ray-optics approximation, an optical system is completely characterized
by the 2 x 2 ray-transfer matrix relating the position and inclination of the transmitted
ray to those of the incident ray (see Sec. 1.4). We now consider how an arbitrary parax-
ial optical system, characterized by a matrix M of elements (A, B, C, D), modifies a
Gaussian beam (Fig. 3.2-9).
Wi W2
Ri Ro
| Figure 3.2-9 Modification of а
| А В Gaussian beam by ап arbitrary
l с р paraxial system described Бу an
ABCD matrix.
q 42
The ABCD Law
The q-parameters, 91 and 42, of the incident and transmitted Gaussian beams at the
input and output planes of a paraxial optical system described by the (A, B, C, D)
matrix are related by
Aq, + В
ре. (3.2-21)
Ca +D The ABCD Law

98 — СНАРТЕВЗ BEAMOPTICS
Because the complex q-parameter identifies the width W and radius of curvature R of
the Gaussian beam (see Exercise 3.1-3), this simple expression, called the ABCD law,
governs the effect of an arbitrary paraxial system on a Gaussian beam. The ABCD
law will be established by verification in special cases; its generality will ultimately be
proved by induction.
Transmission Through Free Space
When the optical system is a distance d of free space (or of any homogeneous medium),
the elements of the ray-transfer matrix М are A = 1, В = d, С = 0, D = 1 [see (1.4-
4)]. Since it has been established earlier that д = 2 + 720 in free space, the q-parameter
is modified by the optical system in accordance with 42 = 41 + а. This is, in fact, is
equal to (1- 41 + d)/(0- 41 + 1) so that the ABCD law is seen to apply.
Transmission Through a Thin Optical Component
An arbitrary thin optical component does not affect the ray position so that
2 =, (3.2-22)
but does alter the inclination angle in accordance with
95 = Cy, + DO, (3.2-23)
as illustrated in Fig. 3.2-10. Thus, A = 1 and В = 0, but С and D are arbitrary.
However, in all of the thin optical components described in Sec. 1.4B, D = п1/п2. By
virtue of the vanishing thickness of the component, the beam width does not change,
1.е.,
И = Wj. (3.2-24)
Moreover, if the beams at the input and output planes of the component are ар-
proximated by spherical waves of radii R; and Re, respectively, then in the paraxial
approximation, when 6; and 05 are small, 91 = y;/R, and 02 = y2/ Re. Substituting
these expressions into (3.2-23), with the help of (3.2-22) we obtain
1 D
—=C+—. 3.2-25
Ro + Ry ( )
Using (3.1-6), which is the expression for 4 as a function of R and W, and noting that
р = п1/п2 = A2/A1, (3.2-24) and (3.2-25) can be combined into a single equation,
1 D
—=C+-, (3.2-26)
92 41
from which 42 = (1:91 + 0)/(Cq: + D), so that the ABCD law again applies.
Invariance of the ABCD Law to Cascading
If the ABCD law is applicable to each of two optical systems with matrices M; =
(A;, B;, C;, Dj), 1 = 1,2, it must also apply to a system comprising their cascade (а
system with matrix М = M)M_,). This may be shown by straightforward substitution.

3.3 HERMITE-GAUSSIAN BEAMS 99
Ri Ro
и y2 Е
22АРЯ, Пре
Optical z
component
Figure 3.2-10 Modification of a Gaussian beam by a thin optical component.
Generality of the ABCD Law
Since the ABCD law applies to thin optical components as well as to propagation
in a homogeneous medium, it also applies to any combination thereof. All of the
paraxial optical systems of interest are combinations of propagation in homogeneous
media and thin optical components such as thin lenses and mirrors. It is therefore
apparent that the ABCD law is applicable to all of these systems. Furthermore, since
an inhomogeneous continuously varying medium may be regarded as a cascade of
incremental thin elements followed by incremental distances, we conclude that the
ABCD law applies to these systems as well, provided that all rays (wavefront normals)
remain paraxial.
ee
EXERCISE 3.2-5
Transmission of a Gaussian Beam Through a Transparent Plate. Use the ABCD law
to examine the transmission of a Gaussian beam from air, through a transparent plate of refractive
index n and thickness d, and again into air. Assume that the beam axis is normal to the plate.
ee
3.3 HERMITE—GAUSSIAN BEAMS
The Gaussian beam is not the only beam-like solution of the paraxial Helmholtz equa-
tion (3.1-2). Of particular interest are solutions that exhibit non-Gaussian intensity
distributions but share the wavefronts of the Gaussian beam. Such beams have the
salutary feature of being able to match the curvatures of spherical mirrors of large
radius, such as those that form an optical resonator, and reflect between them without
being altered. Such self-reproducing waves are called the modes of the resonator (see
Appendix С). The optics of resonators is discussed in Chapter 11.
Consider a Gaussian beam of complex envelope [see (3.1-5)]
Ay ety?
Ас(х,у, z) = —~ exp | —jk ——— 3.3-1
a(x, у, 2) a) P| RSG | (3.3-1)
where q(z) = 2+ 720. Expressions for the beam width W(z) and the wavefront radius
of curvature R(z) are provided in (3.1-8) and (3.1-9), respectively. Now consider a
second wave whose complex envelope is a modulated version of the Gaussian beam,
x у .
А(ж, у, =) = ХУ У2—^ - | exp[j2(z)| Ac(a, y, z 3.3-2
(2) = УЗАМИ] Aclnn2) 632)

100 CHAPTERS BEAMOPTICS
where X(-), Y(-), and Z(-) are real functions. This wave, should it be shown to exist,
has the following two properties:

1. The phase is the same as that of the underlying Gaussian wave, except for an
excess phase Z(z) that is independent of x and у. If Z(z) is a slowly varying
function of z, both waves have wavefronts with the same radius of curvature
R(z). These two waves are therefore focused by thin lenses and mirrors in pre-
cisely the same manner.

2. The magnitude

т y Wo 22 + у?

АХ м2—— 2——_ | —-——— |," 3.3-3

tr) mal lmele le) 939

where Ао = Aj/j2Zo, is a function of x/W(z) and y/W(z) whose widths in

the т and у directions vary with z in accordance with the same scaling factor

И’ (=). Аз z increases, the intensity distribution in the transverse plane remains

fixed, except for a magnification factor W(z). This distribution is a Gaussian

function modulated in the x and у directions by the functions X?(-) and Y?(-),
respectively.

The modulated wave therefore represents a beam of non-Gaussian intensity distri-
bution, but it shares the same wavefronts and angular divergence as the underlying
Gaussian wave.

The existence of this wave is assured if three real functions X(-), Y(-), and Z(z) can
be found such that (3.3-2) satisfies the paraxial Helmholtz equation (3.1-2). Substitut-
ing (3.3-2) into (3.1-2), using the fact that Ag itself satisfies (3.1-2), and defining two
new variables и = V2a/W(z) and v = МЗ y/W(z), we obtain

1 (aX Ox 1 (929 99 OZ
=| as — 2u— — | — - 2u— kW?(z)— =0. 3.3-4
х (Fa we) + (5. opt) + 5. ( )
Since the left-hand side of this equation is the sum of three terms, each of which is a
function of a single independent variable, u, о, and =, respectively, each of these terms
must be constant. Equating the first term to the constant —2и1 and the second to —2p2,
the third must be equal to 2(,1; + 12). This technique of “separation of variables” per-
mits us to reduce the partial differential equation (3.3-4) into three ordinary differential
equations, for X(w), Y(v), and Z(z), respectively:
тех dX
ane = 4X 3.3-5
2 du? ou du ( a)
1 429 dy
—=— — = 3.3-5b
2 dv? re dv Had ( )
2
z dz
20 Е + (=) | = =: pa, (3.3-5c)
20 dz
where we have made use of the expression for W(z) given in (3.1-8) and (3.1-11).

Equation (3.3-5a) represents an eigenvalue problem (see Appendix C) whose eigen-
values are 4 = 1, where 1 = 0,1,2,... and whose eigenfunctions are the Hermite
polynomials X(u) = H(u), [= 0,1,2,.... These polynomials are defined by the
recurrence relation

3.3 HERMITE-GAUSSIAN BEAMS 101
with
Но(и) = 1, Hy (и) = 2u. (3.3-7)
Thus,
Hy(u) = 4u? — 2, Нз(и) = 8ue—12u, .... (3.3-8)
Similarly, the solutions of (3.3-5b) are uw2 = т and Y(v) = Ни(), where m =
0,1,2,.... There is therefore а family of solutions labeled by the indices (1, т). Sub-
stituting wy = 1 and #2 = m in (3.3-5c), and integrating, we obtain
Z(z) = (1+ m) С(=), (3.3-9)
where С(2) = tan~!(z/z9). The excess phase 2(z) thus varies slowly between —(J +
т) 1/2 and +(1 + т) 7/2, аз z varies between —oo and со (see (3.1-10) and Fig. 3.1-
5).
Complex Amplitude
Finally, substitution into (3.3-2) yields an expression for the complex envelope of the
beam labeled by the indices (1, т). Rearranging terms and multiplying by exp(—jkz)
provides the complex amplitude
Wo V2a У2у
Инт (т, у, 2)= Арт | a | Gil Ga | Ст тол
И] | iit
(3.3-10)
; a ty. Hermite—
x exp |—jkz — Жо Ат 1) C(z) Gaussian
2R(z)
Beam
where
—y?2
Gi(u) = НКи) (5) ; 1=0,1,2,... (3.3-11)
is known as the Hermite—Gaussian function of order /, and Aj, is a constant.

Since Ho(u) = 1, the Hermite—Gaussian function of order 0 is simply the Gaussian
function. Continuing to higher order, Gi(u) = 2uexp(—u?/2) is an odd function,
Go(u) = (4u? — 2) exp(—u?/2) is even, Сз(и) = (8u? — 12u) exp(—u?/2) is odd,
and so on. These functions are displayed schematically in Fig. 3.3-1.

Go(u) | G (uv) Go(u) G3(u)

и и и и
Figure 3.3-1 Low-order Hermite—Gaussian functions: (a) Со(и); (5) Gi (и); (©) (и); (а) Сз(и).

102 — СНАРТЕВЗ BEAMOPTICS

An optical wave with complex amplitude given by (3.3-10) is known as a Hermite-
Gaussian beam of order (1, т), which is often denoted HG;,,,. The Hermite—Gaussian
beam of order (0, 0), namely HGop, is the simple Gaussian beam.

Intensity Distribution
The optical intensity of the HG;,,, Hermite-—Gaussian beam, [jm = |Uim|?, is given by
Wo 1° _..| V2a V2y
Пт, у, 2) = Ат |=} G7] | GG} |. 3.3-12
пб = ый Lares] Fares] ЗО OSI)
Figure 3.3-2 illustrates the dependence of the intensity on the normalized transverse
distances и = /22/W(z) and v = V2 y/W(z) for several values of [ and m. Beams
of higher order have larger widths than those of lower order, as is evident in Fig. 3.3-1.
Regardless of the order, however, the width of the beam is proportional to W (=); thus,
as z increases, the transverse spatial extent of the intensity pattern is magnified by the
factor W(z)/Wo but otherwise maintains its profile. The only circularly symmetric
member of the family of Hermite—Gaussian beams is the elementary Gaussian beam
itself.

HGoo HGo1 HGo2 HGi HG) HG 2
Figure 3.3-2 Intensity distributions of several low-order Hermite—Gaussian beams, НО, in the
transverse plane. The HGoo beam is the elementary Gaussian beam displayed in Fig. 3.1-1.

The Hermite—Gaussian beam defined in (3.3-10) may be generalized by ascribing
different beam widths to its x and у components, W,(z) and W,(z), respectively,
thereby defining the elliptic Hermite—Gaussian beam. Because (3.3-10) is a separable
function of x and y, this constitutes yet another exact solution of the paraxial Helmholtz
equation. A special case is the elliptic Gaussian beam that appears in Prob. 3.1-8; it
exhibits elliptical, rather than circular, contours of constant intensity.

3.4 LAGUERRE-GAUSSIAN BEAMS
Laguerre—Gaussian Beams
The Hermite-Gaussian beams form a complete set of solutions to the paraxial
Helmholtz equation. Any other solution can be written as a superposition of these
beams. An alternate complete set of solutions, known as Laguerre—Gaussian beams,
is obtained by writing the paraxial Helmholtz equation in cylindrical coordinates
(р, @, z) and then using the separation-of-variables technique in р and ф, rather than in
x and у. The complex amplitude of the Laguerre—Gaussian beam, denoted LG;,,,, can
be expressed as
1 2 2
Wo р i [ 22 р
U; ‚Ф,2) =А ——~| | —— ] | = Je -—
ее) = Aum [9 (ats) Boe) “(В
2
х exp [ike о ЕЛ9+71+2т +1) а) ‚ (3.4-0)

3.4 LAGUERRE-GAUSSIAN BEAMS 103

where the L!,, (.) represent generalized Laguerre polynomials,” and where И’ (2), R(z),
¢(z), and Wp are given by (3.1-8)—(3.1-11). The integers 1 = 0,1,2,... and т =
0,1,2,... are azimuthal and radial indices, respectively. The lowest-order Laguerre—
Gaussian beam LGgo, like the lowest-order Hermite—Gaussian beam HGop, is the sim-
ple Gaussian beam.
ee
EXERCISE 3.4-1
Laguerre—Gaussian Beam as a Superposition of Hermite-Gaussian Beams. Demon-
strate that the Laguerre-Gaussian beam LGjo is equivalent to the superposition of two Hermite—
Gaussian beams, HGo; and HGjo, with equal amplitudes and a phase shift of 7/2, 1.е., LGig =
ТТТ

The intensity of the Laguerre—Gaussian beam, which is proportional to the absolute
square of (3.4-1), is a function of р and =, but not of ¢, so that it is circularly symmetric.
As illustrated in Fig. 3.4-1(а), the transverse intensity distribution for the LG;) beam
assumes a toroidal shape. Its peak value is attained at a radius of p = \/1/2 W(z),
which increases with the distance z from the beam center (much as for the Gaussian
beam). Beams of any order / 4 0 are also toroidal when m = 0, and attain their peak
values at radii \/1/2 7 (=). All beams with [ 52 0 have zero intensity at the beam center
(p = 0); those with a radial index m > 0 take the form of multiple rings.

y
x y
) | /6 >: pf x
V4
—

(a) Intensity (b) Phase (c) Wavefront
Figure 3.4-1 The Laguerre—Gaussian beam LGj . (a) The transverse intensity distribution takes
the form of a toroid. (b) The phase component /¢, plotted for [ = 1, is a linear function of the
azimuthal angle ф. (с) The wavefront is a left-handed helical surface that undergoes corkscrew-like
motion as it travels in the z direction.

The phase behavior of the Laguerre—Gaussian beam has the same dependence on
p and z as does the Gaussian beam [see (3.1-7)], with two notable exceptions: (1) the
Gouy phase is enhanced by the factor (J + 2m - 1), and (2) there is an additional phase
factor et? that is proportional to the azimuthal angle $. The phase component 1$,
illustrated in Fig. 3.4-1(b) for 1 = 1, is associated with the phase factor exp(—jl¢)
[see (3.1-23) and associated footnote]. It results in the wavefront assuming the form of
a left-handed helix that undergoes corkscrew-like motion as the wave advances in the
z direction, as shown in Fig. 3.4-1(c). Beams with | > 1 have wavefronts comprising |
distinct but intertwined helices. The pitch of each helix is [А and the = sign determines
its handedness.

* The generalized Laguerre polynomials are expressible as L!,, (x) = (m+1)! yy (—a)!/[il(m—a)1(14+-2)}].
A few elementary examples are Lb (2) =1; Li (2) =1-—a41; Lb (2) = 3 (a? — 2(1+2)х + (1+ 1)(0+ 2)].
The generalized Laguerre polynomials М, (a) reduce to the simple Laguerre polynomials [т (2) when [ = 0.

104 — СНАРТЕВЗ BEAMOPTICS

As discussed in Sec. 2.5A, the phase of an optical beam may be determined by
detecting its interference with an auxiliary optical field of known form (e.g., a plane
wave). The phase of a Laguerre—Gaussian beam can be readily observed by detecting
its superposition with another Laguerre—Gaussian beam of the same order but opposite
handedness. Such a superposition, which constitutes a form of standing wave, has an
intensity proportional to | exp(—jl@) + exp(jl@) |? = 4 cos? (1$), explicitly illustrating
that the resulting intensity is sensitive to [$ as shown in Fig. 3.4-2. The number of
angular interference fringes is equal to 21.

= LG30 LG22
Figure 3.4-2 Transverse intensity distributions of the superposition of two Laguerre—Gaussian
beams of the same order LG;,,, but opposite handedness. The dashed white lines signify the loci of
zero intensity (the nodes of the standing waves). The number of such lines is equal to the azimuthal
order [. As the azimuthal angle ф moves from one node to the next, the phase changes by 27.

Laguerre—Gaussian beams may be directly generated as laser modes or as combi-
nations of Hermite—Gaussian laser modes, as discussed in Exercise 3.4-1. A Gaussian
beam may be converted into an Laguerre—Gaussian beam by imparting to it the phase
factor exp(—jld) with the help of a spiral phase plate, a dielectric slab whose optical
thickness increases linearly with @ [see Fig. 3.4-1(6)]. However, the method of choice
for converting a Gaussian beam to a Laguerre—Gaussian beam is to make use of a
diffractive optical element, or hologram, endowed with a fork dislocation centered on
the beam axis, as exhibited in Example 4.5-3.

Beams with spiral phase carry orbital angular momentum. This may be under-
stood by observing that an optical wave carries linear momentum that points along
the direction orthogonal to its wavefronts (see Secs. 5.1 and 13.1D), which is also
the direction of the optical rays. Since rays orthogonal to the helical wavefront of
a Laguerre—Gaussian beam have azimuthal components that revolve about the beam
axis, their linear momentum is accompanied by orbital angular momentum. This can
also be visualized by considering that refracted optical rays incident on the surface of a
spiral phase plate acquire azimuthal components [see Fig. 3.4-1(5)]. By virtue of their
orbital angular momentum, Laguerre—Gaussian beams can exert a mechanical torque
on micro-objects and can thus be used to manipulate microparticles.

Optical Vortices

An optical vortex is an optical field that exhibits a line of zero optical intensity, such
as the line along the axis of a Laguerre—Gaussian beam with [ = 0. It is also called a
screw dislocation since the phase of the field is twisted like a corkscrew about the axis
of travel. An optical vortex in a plane is a point at which the optical field vanishes; it is
also called a phase singularity. An example of the latter is the point (x, у) = (0,0) in
the transverse plane of the Laguerre—Gaussian beam illustrated in Fig. 3.4-1(a).

The strength of a vortex is indicated by its topological charge, which is determined
by the number of full twists that the phase undergoes in a distance of one wavelength.
For the Laguerre—Gaussian beam, the topological charge is the azimuthal index 1,
which is indicated by the number of lines of zero intensity that appear in the standing
wave generated by the combination of two beams of the same order but opposite
handedness, as illustrated in Fig. 3.4-2. This number also determines the orbital angular
momentum of the associated photon, as will be discussed in Sec. 13.1D.

3.5 NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS 105
Optical vortex beams can assume forms that are far more complex than the simple
Laguerre—Gaussian beam. Interference among three or more randomly directed plane-
wave components of similar intensities always results in a field cross-section that
contains many vortices. Such beams often exhibit unusual and dramatic properties —
the field surrounding a vortex can, for example, tangle and form links and knots."
Ince—Gaussian Beams
As discussed in Sec. 3.3 and at the beginning of this section, Hermite—Gaussian
and Laguerre—Gaussian beams form complete sets of exact solutions to the paraxial
Helmholtz equation, in Cartesian and cylindrical coordinates, respectively. A third
complete set of exact solutions, known as Ince—Gaussian (IG) beams," exists in elliptic
cylindrical coordinates, another three-dimensional orthogonal coordinate system. The
transverse structure of these beams is characterized by Ince polynomials, which have
an intrinsic elliptical character. Laguerre-Gaussian and Hermite—Gaussian beams are
limiting forms of Ince—Gaussian beams when the ellipticity parameter is 0 and со,
respectively.
3.5 NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS
A. Bessel Beams
In the search for beam-like waves, it is natural to attempt to construct waves whose
wavefronts are planar but whose intensity distributions are nonuniform in the trans-
verse plane. Consider, for example, a wave with complex amplitude
U(r) = A(x, y)e 9. (3.5-1)
In order that this wave satisfy the Helmholtz equation (2.2-7), V2U + k?U = 0, the
quantity A(x, у) must satisfy
УТА- Е.А = 0, (3.5-2)
where А2, + 8? = k? and V4. = 0?/0x? + 0? /ду? is the transverse Laplacian operator.
Equation (3.5-2), known as the two-dimensional Helmholtz equation, may be solved
by employing the method of separation of variables. Using polar coordinates (x =
pcos ¢, у = psin 9), the result turns out to be
A(x, у) = Am Jm(krp) е7"®, т = 0,+1,+2,..., (3.5-3)
where Л» (-) is the Bessel function of the first kind and mth order, and Аж, is а constant.
Solutions of (3.5-3) that are singular at р = 0 are not included.
For m = 0, the wave has complex amplitude
U(r) = Ао Jo(krp)e”, (3.5-4)
and therefore has planar wavefronts — the wavefront normals (rays) are all parallel to
the z axis. The intensity distribution Г(р, $, =) = |Ao|?J5(krp) is circularly symmetric
1 See М. В. Dennis, В. Р. King, В. Jack, К. O’Holleran, and М. J. Padgett, Isolated Optical Vortex Knots,
Nature Physics, vol. 6, рр. 118—121, 2010.
* See M. A. Bandres and J. C. Gutiérrez-Vega, Ince-Gaussian Beams, Optics Letters, vol. 29, рр. 144-146,
2004.

106  CHAPTER3 BEAMOPTICS
and varies with р as illustrated in Fig. 3.5-1(а); it is independent of z so that there is
no spread of the optical power. This wave is known as the Bessel beam.
YA y
_ | Г |
x 2
y y
x z
Figure 3.5-1 (a) The intensity distribution of the Bessel beam in the transverse plane is
independent of z. The beam is nondiffracting and therefore does not diverge. (b) Transverse intensity
distribution of a Gaussian beam for comparison with the Bessel beam. Parameters are selected such
that the peak intensities and 1/e? widths are identical in both cases.

It is useful to compare the Bessel beam with the Gaussian beam. Whereas the
complex amplitude of the Bessel beam is an exact solution of the Helmholtz equation,
the complex amplitude of the Gaussian beam is only an approximate solution thereof
(since its complex envelope is an exact solution of the paraxial Helmholtz equation).
The intensity distributions of these two beams are compared graphically in Fig. 3.5-1.

It is apparent that the asymptotic behavior of these distributions in the limit of
large radial distances is significantly different. The intensity of the Gaussian beam
decreases exponentially with p as exp[—2p?/W7(z)]. The intensity of the Bessel beam,
on the other hand, decreases as Ji (krp) = (2/mkrp) cos*(krp — 7/4), which is an
oscillatory function superimposed on a slow inverse-power-law decay with p. As a
consequence, the transverse RMS width of the Gaussian beam, о = 3W(z), is finite,
while the transverse RMS width of the ideal Bessel beam is infinite for all z (see
Appendix A, Sec. A.2 for the definition of RMS width). This is a manifestation of the
tradeoff between beam size and divergence: the RMS width of the ideal Bessel beam
is infinite and its divergence is zero, just as for the ideal plane wave.

As shown in Examples 2.4-1 and 4.3-5, the Bessel beam is associated with a con-
tinuum of plane waves whose directions form a cone of fixed half angle with respect
to the propagation direction. It can be implemented by use of an axicon [Fig. 1.2-
12(c)]. A derivation of the complex amplitude for the Bessel beam along with a general
discussion of nondiffracting beams from the perspective of Fourier optics is provided
in Sec. 4.3С.

A hybrid beam, called a Bessel-Gaussian beam, is a Bessel beam modulated by a
Gaussian function of the radial coordinate p. The Gaussian serves as a window function
that accelerates the slow radial decay of the Bessel beam (see Fig. 3.5-1). The Bessel—
Gaussian beam can be generated by illuminating an axicon with a Gaussian beam.

*B. Airy Beams
In analogy with the Bessel beam, the Airy beam arises as a diffraction-free exact solu-
tion to the paraxial Helmholtz equation (2.2-23). Although the shape of its transverse

3.5 NONDIFFRACTING BEAMS 107
intensity distribution is maintained, the beam center is transversally displaced in an
accelerated manner as it propagates along the axial direction,’ as shown in Fig. 3.5-2.

The complex envelope of the Airy beam in one dimension is expressed as

2 3
x z х 2 z
A(x, z) = Ai | — — —, | exp| —71-— — | exp| j—— 3.5-5
where Ai(x) is the Airy function, a special function that is the solution of the Airy
differential equation d?y/dz” = xy. The parameters Wo and 20 are, respectively,
transverse and axial scaling factors that obey the relation W? = Azo/7, which also
applies to the Gaussian beam [see (3.1-11)]. At z = 0 the transverse intensity of the
Airy beam, I(x,0) = Ai? (ax/Wo), is distinctly asymmetrical as illustrated on the
left-hand side of Fig. 3.5-2. At an arbitrary value of z, the intensity has the same
transverse distribution except that it exhibits an axially dependent transverse shift
x = Woz?/(420)” that follows a parabolic trajectory, х = 2” /4а with a = 420 /Wo,
thereby mimicking the path of a ballistic projectile. At z = 429, for example, the
transverse shift is Wo while at z = 202 9 it grows to 25 Wo, which provides the
rationale for the appellation accelerating beam.
x / Wo
I(x, Z)
20
10
0 —
2/20
-10
-20
хе, 0) 0.5 04 0.3 0.2 01 0 0 10 20
Figure 3.5-2 Transverse intensity distribution for the Airy beam Г(х,0) (left) and Г(х, =) (right).

The Airy beam may be generated by making use of an optical Fourier-transform
system, as described in Prob. 4.2-6. Applications of the Airy beam include microscopy
and prodding small particles along curved trajectories.

Other Bessel-like and Airy-like beams with main-lobe intensity distributions that
remain nearly invariant and symmetrical as they travel can be engineered to propagate
along arbitrary trajectories in free space (including 3D spirals).* These nondiffract-
ing beams, which can be partially obstructed and yet recover further down the beam
axis (so-called “‘self-healing”), are useful for applications such as optical trapping and
precision drilling.

1 See С. А. Siviloglou, J. Broky, A. Dogariu, and О. М. Christodoulides, Observation of Accelerating Airy
Beams, Physical Review Letters, vol. 99, 213901, 2007.

* See J. Zhao, P. Zhang, D. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Gao, I. D. Chremmos, N. K. Efremidis, D. N. Christodoulides,
and Z. Chen, Observation of Self-Accelerating Bessel-Like Optical Beams Along Arbitrary Trajectories, Optics
Letters, vol. 38, pp. 498-500, 2013.

108 CHAPTER 3 BEAM OPTICS
READING LIST

Books

See also the reading list on lasers in Chapter 16.

J. Secor, R. Alfano, and S. Ashrafi, Complex Light, IOP Publishing, 2017.

Е М. Dickey, ed., Laser Beam Shaping: Theory and Techniques, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2nd
ed. 2014.

А. М. Oraevsky, Gaussian Beams and Optical Resonators, Nova Science, 1996.

Articles

М. J. Padgett, Orbital Angular Momentum 25 Years On, Optics Express, vol. 25, pp. 11265-11274,
2017.

J. Zhao, P. Zhang, D. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Gao, I. D. Chremmos, N. K. Efremidis, D. N. Christodoulides,
and Z. Chen, Observation of Self-Accelerating Bessel-Like Optical Beams Along Arbitrary Tra-
jectories, Optics Letters, vol. 38, pp. 498—500, 2013.

A. Dudley, M. Lavery, M. Padgett, and A. Forbes, Unraveling Bessel Beams, Optics & Photonics
News, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 22-29, 2013.

A. M. Yao and M. J. Padgett, Orbital Angular Momentum: Origins, Behavior and Applications,
Advances in Optics and Photonics, vol. 3, pp. 161-204, 2011.

M. R. Dennis, R. P. King, B. Jack, K. O’Holleran, and M. J. Padgett, Isolated Optical Vortex Knots,
Nature Physics, vol. 6, pp. 118—121, 2010.

М. В. Dennis, К. O’Holleran, and М. J. Padgett, Singular Optics: Optical Vortices and Polarization
Singularities, in E. Wolf, ed., Progress in Optics, Elsevier, 2009, vol. 53, pp. 293-363.

J. Vickers, M. Burch, R. Vyas, and S. Singh, Phase and Interference Properties of Optical Vortex
Beams, Journal of the Optical Society of America A, vol. 25, pp. 823-827, 2008.

M. Martinelli and P. Martelli, Laguerre Mathematics in Optical Communications, Optics & Photonics
News, vol. 19, по. 2, рр. 30-35, 2008.

G. A. Siviloglou, J. Broky, A. Dogariu, and D. N. Christodoulides, Observation of Accelerating Airy
Beams, Physical Review Letters, vol. 99, 213901, 2007.

М. A. Bandres and J. С. Gutiérrez- Vega, Ince-Gaussian Modes of the Paraxial Wave Equation and
Stable Resonators, Journal of the Optical Society of America, vol. 21, pp. 873-880, 2004.

Е. Gori, G. Guattari, and С. Padovani, Bessel-Gauss Beams, Optics Communications, vol. 64,
pp. 491-495, 1987.

J. Durnin, J. J. Miceli, Jr., and J. H. Eberly, Diffraction-Free Beams, Physical Review Letters, vol. 58,
pp. 1499-1501, 1987.

Special issue on propagation and scattering of beam fields, Journal of the Optical Society of America
A, vol. 3, no. 4, 1986.

H. Kogelnik and T. Li, Laser Beams and Resonators, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 54, pp. 1312—
1329, 1966.

G. D. Boyd and J. P. Gordon, Confocal Multimode Resonator for Millimeter Through Optical Wave-
length Masers, Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 40, pp. 489-508, 1961.

A. G. Fox and T. Li, Resonant Modes in a Maser Interferometer, Bell System Technical Journal,
vol. 40, pp. 453-488, 1961.

PROBLEMS
3.1-6 Beam Parameters. The light emitted from a Nd:YAG laser at a wavelength of 1.06 um is
a Gaussian beam of 1-W optical power and beam divergence 20) = 1 mrad. Determine the
beam waist radius, the depth of focus, the maximum intensity, and the intensity on the beam

axis at a distance z = 100 cm from the beam waist.

3.1-7 Beam Identification by Two Widths. A Gaussian beam of wavelength A, = 10.6 ит

(emitted by a СО) laser) has widths И”, = 1.699 mm and И” = 3.380 mm at two points
separated by a distance d = 10 cm. Determine the location of the waist and the waist radius.

PROBLEMS 109

3.1-8 The Elliptic Gaussian Beam. The paraxial Helmholtz equation admits a Gaussian beam with
intensity I(a,y,0) = |Ao|? exp[—2(x?/We,, + y?/W3,)] in the = = 0 plane, with the beam
waist radii Wo, and Wo, in the x and y directions, respectively. The contours of constant
intensity are therefore ellipses instead of circles. Write expressions for the beam depth of
focus, angular divergence, and radii of curvature in the x and y directions, as functions of
Woz, Woy, and the wavelength Л. If Woz = 2Woy, sketch the shape of the beam spot in the
z = 0 plane and in the far field (z much greater than the depths of focus in both transverse
directions).

3.2-6 Beam Focusing. An argon-ion laser produces a Gaussian beam of wavelength \ = 488 nm
with waist radius Wo = 0.5 mm. Design a single-lens optical system for focusing the light to
a spot of diameter 100 дла. What is the shortest focal-length lens that may be used?

3.2-7 Spot Size. A Gaussian beam of Rayleigh range 20 = 50 cm and wavelength Л = 488 nm is
converted into a Gaussian beam of waist radius И) using a lens of focal length f = 5 cm at
a distance z from its waist, as illustrated in Fig. 3.2-2. Plot Wj as a function of 2. Verify that
in the limit z — f >> эх, (3.2-10) and (3.2-12) hold; and that in the limit z < хо, (3.2-13)
holds.

3.2-8 Beam Refraction. A Gaussian beam is incident from air (п = 1) into a medium with a
planar boundary and refractive index n = 1.5. The beam axis is normal to the boundary and
the beam waist lies at the boundary. Sketch the transmitted beam. If the angular divergence
of the beam in air is 1 mrad, what is the angular divergence in the medium?

*3.2-9 Transmission of a Gaussian Beam Through a Graded-Index Slab. The ABC D matrix of
а SELFOC graded-index slab with quadratic refractive index n(y) = no(1 — за?у?) (see
Sec. 1.3B) and length d is A = cosad, B = (1/a)sinad, C = —asinad, D = cosad
for paraxial rays along the z direction. A Gaussian beam of wavelength Ло, waist radius Wo
in free space, and axis in the z direction enters the slab at its waist. Use the ABCD law to
determine an expression for the beam width in the y direction as a function of d. Sketch the
shape of the beam as it travels through the medium.

3.3-2 Power Confinement in Hermite-Gaussian Beams. Determine the ratio of the power соп-
tained within a circle of radius W(z) in the transverse plane, to the total power, for the
Hermite—Gaussian beams HGoo, НСо1, НОло, and HG;,. What is the ratio of the power
contained within a circle of radius rH W (2) to the total power for the HGoy and HG, beams?

3.3-3 The Donut Beam. Consider a wave that is a superposition of two Hermite—Gaussian beams,
HGo, and HGjo, with equal intensities. The two beams have independent and random phases
so that their intensities add with no interference. Show that the total intensity is described
by a donut-shaped (toroidal) circularly symmetric function. Assuming that Wo = 1 mm,
determine the radius of the circle of peak intensity and the radii of the two circles of 1/e?
times the peak intensity at the beam waist.

3.3-4 Axial Phase. Consider the Hermite—Gaussian beams of all orders, НС», with Rayleigh
range 20 = 30 cm in a medium of refractive index n = 1. Determine the frequencies within
the band и = 10 +2 x 10° Hz for which the phase retardation between the planes z = — zp
and z = 20 is an integer multiple of 7 along the beam axis. These frequencies are the modes
of a resonator comprising two spherical mirrors placed at the z = +2 planes, as described
in Sec. 11.2D.

CHAPTER
с [
4.1 РАОРАСАПОМ OF LIGHT IN FREE SPACE 113

A. Spatial Harmonic Functions and Plane Waves

B. Transfer Function of Free Space

C. Impulse Response Function of Free Space

D. Huygens—Fresnel Principle
4.2 OPTICAL FOURIER TRANSFORM 124

А. Fourier Transform in the Far Field

B. Fourier Transform Using a Lens
4.3 DIFFRACTION OF LIGHT 129

A. Fraunhofer Diffraction

*В. Fresnel Diffraction

*C. Nondiffracting Waves
4.4 IMAGE FORMATION 137

A. Вау Optics of a Single-Lens Imaging System

B. Wave Optics of a 4-f Imaging System

C. Wave Optics of a Single-Lens Imaging System

D. Near-Field Imaging
4.5 HOLOGRAPHY 147

\ : 2% ‘ey
x = 8 /

Josef von Fraunhofer (1787- Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier Dennis Gabor (1900-1979)
1826) developed the diffrac- (1768-1830) demonstrated that invented holography and con-
tion grating and contributed to periodic functions could be _ tributed to its development. He
our understanding of diffrac- constructed from sums of sinu- made the first hologram in
tion. His epitaph reads Approx- — 30145. Harmonic analysis 15 the 1947 and received the Nobel
imavit sidera (he brought the basis of Fourier optics; it has Рите in 1971 for carrying out
stars closer). many applications. this body of work.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
110

CSC
Fourier optics provides a description of the propagation of light waves based on har-
monic analysis (the Fourier transform) and linear systems. The methods of harmonic
analysis have proved useful for describing signals and systems in many disciplines.
Harmonic analysis is based on the expansion of an arbitrary function of time f(t) in
terms of a superposition (a sum or integral) of harmonic functions of time of different
frequencies (see Appendix A, Sec. A.1). The harmonic function F'(v) exp(j27vt),
which has frequency и and complex amplitude F'(v), is the building block of the
theory. Several of these functions, each with its own amplitude F'(v), are added to
construct the function f(t), as illustrated in Fig. 4.0-1. The complex amplitude F'(v),
as a function of frequency, is called the Fourier transform of f(t). This approach is
highly useful for analyzing linear systems (see Appendix B, Sec. B.1). If the response
of the system to each harmonic function is known, the response to an arbitrary input
function is readily determined by the use of harmonic analysis at the input of the system
and superposition at the output.
KO

Figure 4.0-1 An arbitrary function f(t) may be analyzed as a sum of harmonic functions of
different frequencies and complex amplitudes.

An arbitrary complex function f(x,y) of two variables that represent spatial co-
ordinates in a plane, say т and у, may similarly be written as a superposition of
harmonic functions of x and у, each of the form F(vz, vy) exp[—j2m(v2x + vyy)],
where F'(v,,, м,) is the complex amplitude and и, and и, are the spatial frequencies
(cycles per unit length; typically cycles/mm) in the x and y directions, respectively."
The harmonic function Е (их, vy) exp[—j27(v,x + Vyy)| is the two-dimensional build-
ing block of the theory. It can be used to generate an arbitrary function of two variables
f(x,y), as depicted in Fig. 4.0-2 and explained in Appendix A, Sec. А.З.

rf
Vf \” Aa
= - \ + AA +...
x OMA
Ax, у)
Figure 4.0-2 An arbitrary function f(x,y) may be analyzed in terms of a sum of harmonic
functions of different spatial frequencies and complex amplitudes, drawn here schematically as
graded blue lines.

The monochromatic plane wave U(x, y,z) = Aexp[—j(krz + kyy + kzz)] plays
an important role in wave optics. The coefficients (kz, ky,k,) are the components
of the wavevector К, and A is a complex constant. U(x, y, z) reduces to a spatial
harmonic function of the points in an arbitrary plane. At the z = 0 plane, for exam-
ple, U(x, y,0) becomes the harmonic function f(x,y) = Aexp[—j27(v,x + vyy)],

* The spatial harmonic function is defined with a minus sign in the exponent, in contrast to the plus sign
used in the definition of the temporal harmonic function (compare (А.1-1) and (A.3-1) in Appendix A). This sign
convention is chosen to match that for the forward-traveling plane wave set forth in (2.2-11).

111

112 CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS

where и, = К,/2л and и, = k,/27 are the spatial frequencies (cycles/mm), and
К. and К, are the spatial angular frequencies (radians/mm). There is a one-to-one
correspondence between the plane wave U(x, у, z) and the spatial harmonic function
f(x,y) = О(х, у, 0) since knowledge of kz and k, is sufficient to determine К. via the
relation Ао + ky + k2 = w?/c* = (2т/Л)?. As will be explained subsequently, ky and
Ку may not exceed w/c under usual circumstances; i.e., the spatial frequencies и, and
и, May not exceed the inverse wavelength 1/..

Since an arbitrary function f(a, у) can be analyzed as a superposition of harmonic
functions, an arbitrary traveling wave U(x, y, z) may be analyzed in terms of a sum of
plane waves (Fig. 4.0-3). The plane wave is thus the building block used to construct a
wave of arbitrary complexity. Furthermore, if it can be determined how a linear optical
system modifies plane waves, the principle of superposition can be used to establish
the effect of the system on an arbitrary wave.

) \ АА Figure 4.0-3 The principle of Fourier optics:
= = \ ААА — An arbitrary wave in free space can be analyzed
) } | | | | | in terms of a superposition of plane waves.

Because of the important role that Fourier analysis plays in describing linear sys-
tems, it is useful to consider the propagation of light through linear optical components,
including free space, in terms of a linear-systems approach. The complex amplitudes
at two planes normal to the optic (z) axis are regarded as the input and output of
the system (Fig. 4.0-4). A linear system may be characterized by either its impulse
response function, which is the response of the system to a point (i.e., an impulse) at
its input, or by its transfer function, which is the response of the system to a set of
spatial harmonic functions (as described in Appendix B).

“ U(x,y,2) * Figure 4.0-4 The transmission of an
)) optical wave U(x, у, =) through an op-
, tical system located between an input
cf (( Е. plane z = 0 and an output plane z = d.
} This configuration is regarded as a linear
4 y system whose input and output are the
У \ y | functions of f(x,y) = U(a,y,0) and
plane 5 =0 it ge а g(x,y) =((х, у, d), respectively.
This Chapter
The chapter begins with a Fourier description of the propagation of monochromatic
light in free space (Sec. 4.1). The transfer function and impulse response function of
the free-space propagation system are determined. In Sec. 4.2 we show that a lens
may be used to carry out the spatial Fourier-transform operation. The transmission
of light through apertures is discussed in Sec. 4.3; this section comprises a Fourier-
optics approach to the diffraction of light, a subject usually presented in introductory
textbooks from the perspective of the Huygens principle. Section 4.4 is devoted to
image formation and spatial filtering in the context of both ray and wave optics. Sub-
wavelength imaging, in the form of near-field optical microscopy, is also considered.
Finally, an introduction to holography, the recording and reconstruction of optical
waves, is presented in Sec. 4.5. It is important to understand the basic properties of
Fourier transforms and linear systems in one and two dimensions (as reviewed in
Appendices A and B, respectively) to follow this chapter.

4.1 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT INFREE SPACE 113
4.1 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT IN FREE SPACE
A. Spatial Harmonic Functions and Plane Waves
A monochromatic plane wave of complex amplitude U(x, y,z) = Aexp[—j(kix +
kyy + К.2)] has wavevector К = (kz,ky,kz), wavelength A, wavenumber k =
kz +k? +k2 = 27/A, and complex envelope A. The vector К makes angles 0, =
sin-'(k,/k) and 9, = sin~'(k,/k) with the y-z and 2—2 planes, respectively, аз
illustrated in Fig. 4.1-1. Thus, if 0, = 0, there is no component of К in the x
direction. The complex amplitude at the z = 0 plane, U(x, y,0), is a spatial harmonic
function f(x,y) = Aexp[—j27(vzx + vyy)| with spatial frequencies и, = К,/2п
and vy = А,/2т. The angles of the wavevector are therefore related to the spatial
frequencies of the harmonic function by
0, = эт "Ли, Oy, =sin! Avy. (4.1-1)
Spatial Frequencies and Angles
The spatial frequency и = k/2z is specified т cycles/mm, whereas the optical
frequency и = Кс/2п = с/ is specified in cycles/sec or Hz, as shown in Sec. 2.2.
Recognizing A, = 1/и, and A, = 1/v, as the periods of the harmonic functions
in the x and у directions (mm/cycle), we see that the angles 0, = sin~'(\/A,) and
0, = sin~'(A/A,) are governed by the ratios of the wavelength of light to the period
of the harmonic function in each direction. These geometrical relations follow from
matching the wavefronts of the wave to the periodic pattern of the harmonic function
in the z = 0 plane, as illustrated in Fig. 4.1-1.
© Plane
DEK 7. 9х = sin-!] Avy
Wg Harmonic
у function f(x,y)
Figure 4.1-1 A harmonic function of spatial frequencies и, and и, at the plane z = 0 is consistent
with a plane wave traveling at angles 0, = sin! Av, and 9, = sin”! My.
ШК, < Капа К, < К, so that the wavevector К is paraxial, the angles 6, and 6,
are small (sin 0, = 0; and sin 0, = 6,) and
9, = Avy, Oy = AVy. (4.1-2)
Spatial Frequencies and Angles
(Paraxial Approximation)
The angles of inclination of the wavevector are then directly proportional to the spatial
frequencies of the corresponding harmonic function. Apparently, there is a one-to-one

114. CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
correspondence between the plane wave U(x, у, z) and the harmonic function f(x, у).
Given one, the other can be readily determined, provided the wavelength is known:
the harmonic function f(a, у) is obtained by sampling at the z = 0 plane, f(x,y) =
U(a, у, 0). Given the harmonic function f(«, у), on the other hand, the wave U(x, у, 2)
is constructed by using the relation U(x, у, 2) = f(x, у) exp(—jkzz) with

К. = 44/k? — № — №, К = 2” /^. (4.1-3)

А condition for the validity of this correspondence is that k? + ks < k?, so that К,
is real. This condition implies that Ли, < 1 and Av, < 1, so that the angles 9., and
9, defined by (4.1-1) exist. The + and — signs in (4.1-3) represent waves traveling in
the forward and backward directions, respectively. We shall be concerned with forward
waves only.

Spatial Spectral Analysis
When a plane wave of unity amplitude traveling in the z direction is transmitted
through a thin optical element with complex amplitude transmittance f(x,y) =
exp[—j27(vzx + vyy)| the wave is modulated by the harmonic function, so that
U(x,y,0) = f(a,y). The incident wave is then converted into a plane wave with а
wavevector at angles 0, = sin~! Av, and 9, = sin! Avy (see Fig. 4.1-2). The element
thus acts much as a prism, bending the wave upward in this illustration. If the complex
amplitude transmittance is f(x,y) = ехр[ +72 (ит + vyy)], the wave is converted
into a plane wave whose wavevector makes angles —6, and —0, with the z axis, so the
wave is bent downward instead.
x
А
a
№ k
— А
\ № 6, = sin! Лых
5
Aes Lux Say)
Figure 4.1-2 A thin element whose complex amplitude transmittance is a harmonic function of
spatial frequency и, (period Л. = 1/v,) bends a plane wave of wavelength Л by an angle 0, =
эт | Av, = эт 1 (Л/Л,). The dark blue and white stripes are used to indicate that the element is a
phase grating (changing only the phase of the wave).

The wave-deflection property of an optical element with harmonic-function trans-
mittance may be understood as an interference phenomenon. In a direction making an
angle 0, two points on the element separated by a the period A = 1/v,, have a relative
pathlength difference of Asin 6, = (1/v,)Av_, = A, 1.е., equal to a wavelength. Hence,
all segments separated by a period interfere constructively in this direction.

If the transmittance of the optical element f(x,y) is the sum of several harmonic
functions of different spatial frequencies, the transmitted optical wave is also the sum
of an equal number of plane waves dispersed into different directions; each spatial
frequency is mapped into a corresponding direction, in accordance with (4.1-1). The
amplitude of each wave is proportional to the amplitude of the corresponding harmonic
component of f(x,y).

4.1 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT INFREE SPACE 115
Examples.
=" A complex amplitude transmittance of the form f(x,y) = cos(27y,7) =
${exp(— j2tV,x) + exp(+j2mv,x)} bends an incident plane wave into compo-
nents traveling at angles + sin~'(Av,), namely in both the upward and downward
directions.
= An element with a transmittance that varies as 1 + cos(27v yy) behaves as a
diffraction grating (see Exercise 2.4-5); the incident wave is bent into components
that travel to the right and left, while a portion travels straight through.
= An element with transmittance f(x,y) = Ц[соз(2ти,х)], where U() is the unit
step function [U(x) = lif > 0, and U(x) = 0 if x < 0], represents a periodic
set of slits with f(x, у) = 1 set in an opaque screen [ f(x, у) = 0]. This periodic
function may be analyzed via a Fourier series as a sum of harmonic functions of
spatial frequencies 0, +v,, +2v,,..., corresponding to waves traveling at angles
0,+sin~! Av,,+sin~!2\v,,..., with amplitudes proportional to the coefficients
of the Fourier series (in the case at hand, these vanish for even harmonics). At
these angles, the waves transmitted through the slits interfere constructively.
More generally, if f(x, y) is a superposition integral of harmonic functions,
со
fea) = || Колы ео + vyy)] dre dry, (4.1-4)
—©
with frequencies (и, и,) and amplitudes Е (и, v,), the transmitted wave U(x, у, z) is
the superposition of plane waves,
CO
ен.) = | | Роль) exp [sma + Эту) exp(—jhe2) ds diy,
—oo
(4.1-5)
with complex envelopes F'(v,, Vy) where К, = ,/k? — К — К =2n,/\~* — v2 — v2.
Note that Р(и,, му) is the Fourier transform of f(a, у) [see (A.3-2) in Appendix A].
Since an arbitrary function may be Fourier analyzed as a superposition integral of
the form (4.1-4), the light transmitted through a thin optical element of arbitrary trans-
mittance may be written as a superposition of plane waves (see Fig. 4.1-3), provided
that v2 + И <л 2.
* ae \\
к \ АА Figure 4.1-3 А thin optical element
—_> ААА А\ АА ААА “> of amplitude transmittance f(x,y) de-
I) \\ \\ А il composes an incident plane wave into
| | many plane waves. The plane wave
ИТ || | 5 traveling at the angles 6, = эт "Ли,
11) ; and 9, = зш Ли, has a complex en-
Mf / velope Е, м), the Fourier transform
This process of “spatial spectral analysis” is akin to the angular dispersion of dif-
ferent temporal-frequency components (wavelengths) provided by a prism. Free-space

116 CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS

propagation serves as a natural “spatial prism,” sensitive to the spatial rather than the
temporal frequencies of the optical wave.

Amplitude Modulation

Consider a transparency with complex amplitude transmittance fo(x, у). If the Fourier
transform Fo(v,, ¥y) extends over widths Ди, and Ди, in the x and у directions,
the transparency will deflect an incident plane wave by angles 0, and 9, in the range
+ шт '(ЛДи,) and +sin~'(\Av,), respectively.

Consider a second transparency of complex amplitude transmittance f(x,y) =
(5, у) exp[—j27(v20x + Yyoy)], where (5х, у) is slowly varying compared to
exp|—j27(vz0% + vyoy)] so that Ди, < и» and Ди, < ир. We may regard
f(x,y) as an amplitude-modulated function with a carrier frequency иго and Vyo and
modulation function fo(x,y). The Fourier transform of f(x,y) is Fo(Uz — Изо, Vy —
Vo), in accordance with the frequency-shifting property of the Fourier transform (see
Appendix A). The transparency will deflect a plane wave to directions centered about
the angles 0,9 = sin! Avo and O40 = sin7! Аи (Fig. 4.1-4). This can also be readily
seen by regarding f(x,y) as a transparency of transmittance (т, у) in contact with
a grating or prism of transmittance exp[—j27(v,90% + Vyoy)| that provides the angular
deflection 0,9 and 6,9.

x x
AA N
yy =
Y sin! Avy
< Vii Z
Y
у \ рогу) у \ Sosy) exp(—j 27149.)
Figure 4.1-4 Deflection of light by the transparencies № (т, у) and (т, у) exp(—j27vz92). The
“carrier” harmonic function ехр(—72тиот) acts as a prism that deflects the wave by an angle 0.9 =
эт Ли,о.

This idea may be used to record two images f(x,y) and f2(z,y) on the same
transparency using the spatial-frequency multiplexing scheme f(x,y) = fi(x,y)
exp|—j27(Vaiz + илу)] + fo(x, у) exp[—j2m(v22x + Vy2y)]. The two images may
be easily separated by illuminating the transparency with a plane wave, whereupon the
two images are deflected at different angles and are thus separated. This principle will
prove useful in holography (Sec. 4.5), where it is often desired to separate two images
recorded on the same transparency.

Frequency Modulation

The foregoing examples relate to the transmittance of plane waves through transparen-
cies endowed with one or more 2D harmonic functions that extend over the entire
region of the transparency. We now examine the transmission of a plane wave through
a transparency comprising a “collage” of several regions, the transmittance of each of
which is a harmonic function of some spatial frequency, as illustrated in Fig. 4.1-5.
If the dimensions of each region are much greater than the period, each region acts
as a grating or prism that deflects the wave in a particular direction, so that different
portions of the incident wavefront are deflected into different directions. This principle
may be used to create maps of optical interconnections, as described in Sec. 24.1A.

4.1 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT IN FREE SPACE 117
yp |
Y р GZ Г. Figure 4.1-5 Deflection of light bya trans-
Ali parency made of several harmonic functions
= ap (phase gratings) of different spatial frequen-
Ш й cies.

A transparency may also have a harmonic transmittance with a spatial frequency
that varies continuously and slowly with position (in comparison with Л), much as the
frequency of a frequency-modulated (FM) signal varies slowly with time. Consider,
for example, the phase function f(x,y) = exp[—j27y(za, y)|], where y(x,y) is a
continuous slowly varying function of x and у. In the neighborhood of a point (9, yo),
we may use the Taylor-series expansion (x, у) = (20, yo) +(%@—20) Ue + (y—Yyo) Vy,
where the derivatives и, = дф/дх and и, = дф/ду are evaluated at the position
(то, Yo). The local variation of f(x,y) with x and у is therefore proportional to the
quantity exp[—j27(v,x2 + y)], which is a harmonic function with spatial frequencies
и, = Op/Ox and vy = дф/ду. Since these derivatives vary with x and у, so do the
spatial frequencies. The transparency f(x,y) = exp|—j27y(z, y)] therefore deflects
the portion of the wave at the position (a, у) by the position-dependent angles 0, =
эт '(Лдф/д2) and 6, = sin“! (ADp/dy).
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 4.1-1. Scanning. A thin transparency with complex amplitude transmittance
f(x,y) = exp(jrx?/Af) introduces a phase shift 27y(x,y) where y(x,y) = —x?/2Af, so that
the wave is deflected at the position (x,y) by the angles 0, = sin '(лдф/дт) = зш '(-ж/ 1)
and 6, = 0. If |a/f| < 1, 6, = —a/f and the deflection angle 6, is directly proportional to the
transverse distance x. This transparency may be used to deflect a narrow beam of light. Moreover, if
the transparency is moved at a uniform speed, the beam is deflected by a linearly increasing angle as
illustrated in Fig. 4.1-6.

x РЯ

Figure 4.1-6 Making use of a frequency- Figure 4.1-7 A transparency with transmit-
modulated transparency to scan an optical tance f(x,y) = exp[jn(x? + y)/Af] acts as a
beam. spherical lens with focal length f.

EXAMPLE 4.1-2. Imaging. If the transparency illustrated in Example 4.1-1 is illuminated by
a plane wave, each strip of the wave at a given value of x is deflected by a different angle and as
a result the wavefront is altered. The local wavevector at position x bends by an angle —2/f so
that all wavevectors meet at a single line on the optical axis a distance f from the transparency.
The transparency then acts as a cylindrical lens with a focal length f. Similarly, a transparency
with transmittance f(x,y) = exp[ja(x? + y?)/Af] acts as a spherical lens with focal length },
as illustrated in Fig. 4.1-7. Indeed, this is the expression for the amplitude transmittance of a thin lens
provided in (2.4-9).
ПОНИ

118 — CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
ee
EXERCISE 4.1-1
Binary-Plate Cylindrical Lens. Use harmonic analysis near the position x to show that a trans-
parency with complex amplitude transmittance equal to the binary function
12
f(x,y) = i cos (“=)| ; (4.1-6)
where U/(z) is the unit step function [U(2) = lifaw > 0, and U(x) = Ох < 0], acts as a cylindrical
lens with multiple focal lengths equal to со, +f, +f/3, £f/5,....
ый р yy
Ai
Za и, Figure 4.1-8 Binary plate as a
C7 ae Z cylindrical lens with multiple foci.
ee
Fresnel Zone Plate
A two-dimensional generalization of the binary plate in Exercise 4.1-1 is a circularly
symmetric transparency of complex amplitude transmittance
2 2
xu +
f(x,y) =U cos (=) ; (4.1-7)
АЛ
known as the Fresnel zone plate. It is a set of ring apertures of increasing radii,
decreasing widths, and equal areas (see Fig. 4.1-9). The structure serves as a spher-
ical lens with multiple focal lengths. A ray incident at each point is split into
multiple rays, and the transmitted rays meet at multiple foci with focal lengths
со, tf, +f/3, +f/5, ..., together with a component transmitted without deflection.
The operation of the Fresnel zone plate may also be described in terms of inter-
ference (see Sec. 2.5B). The center of the mth ring has a radius р», at the mth peak
of the cosine function, 1.е., пр? /Л} = m2. Ага focal point = = f, the distance
Rm to the mth ring is given by R2, = f? + р, so that В, = УР +2mAf.
If f is sufficiently large so that the angles subtended by the rings are small, then
Rm = }-+тлА. Thus, the waves transmitted through consecutive rings have pathlengths
differing by a wavelength, so that they interfere constructively at the focal point. A
similar argument applies for the other foci.
x
4 SAN
Uf | Кт
Л е )) | Figure 4.1-9 The Fresnel zone

4.1 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT INFREE SPACE 119
B. Transfer Function of Free Space
We now examine the propagation of a monochromatic optical wave of wavelength A
and complex amplitude U(x, y, z) in the free space between the planes z = 0 and
z = d, called the input and output planes, respectively (see Fig. 4.1-10). Given the
complex amplitude of the wave at the input plane, f(x,y) = U(«,y,0), we shall
determine the complex amplitude at the output plane, g(x, у) = 0 (т, у, а).

“ (ху,
ху) (X,Y)
—>
и H

x
y
Figure 4.1-10 Propagation of light between two planes is regarded as a linear system whose input
and output are the complex amplitudes of the wave in the two planes.

We regard f(x, у) and g(, у) as the input and output of a linear system. The system
is linear since the Helmholtz equation, which U(x, y, z) must satisfy, is linear. The
system is shift-invariant because of the invariance of free space to displacement of
the coordinate system. A linear shift-invariant system is characterized by its impulse
response function h(x, у) or by its transfer function H(v,,,), as explained in Ap-
pendix B, Sec. B.2. We now proceed to determine expressions for these functions.

The transfer function Н(и», м,) is the factor by which an input spatial harmonic
function of frequencies и, and у is multiplied to yield the output harmonic function.
We therefore consider a harmonic input function f(x,y) = Aexp[—j2a(vzx + vyy)].
As explained earlier, this corresponds to a plane wave U(x, y, z) = Aexp[—j(k2v +
kyy + К.2)] where К, = 27vz, ky = 27vy, and

k, =/k? К = 20\/A 72 -— v2 - vy. (4.1-8)

The output g(x, у) = Aexp[—j(k,x + kyy + kd)], so that we can write Н(и,, vy) =

g(x, y)/f (x,y) = exp(—jk-d), from which

H(vz, Vy) = exp(—j2md, [\-? -~v2—ve ) . (4.1-9)

Transfer Function

of Free Space

The transfer function H(v;, v,) is therefore a circularly symmetric complex function of
the spatial frequencies и, and v,. Its magnitude and phase are sketched in Fig. 4.1-11.

For spatial frequencies for which v? + ve < \~? (1.е., frequencies lying within a
circle of radius 1/2) the magnitude |H(v,,,)| = 1 and the phase arg{H(vz,v,)} isa
function of и, and v,. A harmonic function with such frequencies therefore undergoes
a spatial phase shift as it propagates, but its magnitude is not altered.

At higher spatial frequencies, мо + v7 > A~°, the quantity under the square root in
(4.1-9) is negative so that the exponent is real and the transfer function exp[—27d(v2 +
v2 — \~*)!/2) represents an attenuation factor; the wave is then called an evanescent

120  CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
||
р А
x — = >>
Harmonic | Plane wave | J 1 [1 =
function { их rl
4 a per vy
Ux к и Shifted НА оо Их
harmonic р
к A function
x. d —__—>]
х! Vy
их
Figure 4.1-11 Magnitude and phase of the transfer function H(v,, v,) for free-space propagation
between two planes separated by a distance а.
wave.’ When и, = (v2 + и?) exceeds Л" slightly, 1.е., vp = A~1, the attenua-
tion factor is exp[—2d(v2 — A~?)"/?] = exp[—2md(vp — ХМ (и, + 7)? ] =
exp[—2md(v, — A71)'/2(2A71)"/2], which equals exp(—27) when (и, — A7!) =
\/2d?, or (vp — 1/X)/(1/A) = 4(A/d)?. For d > Л the attenuation factor decreases
sharply when the spatial frequency slightly exceeds \~', as illustrated in Fig. 4.1-11.
We may therefore regard \~~ as the cutoff spatial frequency (the spatial bandwidth) of
the system. Thus,
The spatial bandwidth of light propagation in free space is approximately
А! cycles/mm.
Features contained in spatial frequencies greater than \~! (corresponding to details
of size finer than Л) cannot be transmitted by an optical wave of wavelength Л over
distances much greater than А.
Fresnel Approximation
The expression for the transfer function in (4.1-9) may be simplified if the input func-
tion f(x,y) contains only spatial frequencies that are much smaller than the cutoff
frequency \~', so Шаги? и) < ~°. The plane-wave components of the propagating
light then make small angles 6, = Av, and 6, = Av, corresponding to paraxial rays.
Denoting 6° = 67, + 6; = \*(v2 + v2), where 0 is the angle with the optical axis,
the phase factor in (4.1-9) is
d
2rdy/\~2 — v2 — ve = 2 У 1-9?
1 Evanescent waves are neither forward пог backward propagating; rather, they propagate in the transverse
plane where they are generated. We select the negative sign before the square root in (4.1-3) because such waves
must attenuate, rather than grow, in the positive z direction absent a gain mechanism enabling them to grow.

4.1 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT INFREE SPACE 121
d 6? 0“
=27—-{1-—-—+—-.:--]. 4.1-10
п ( 5 + 3 ) ( )
Neglecting the third and higher terms of this expansion, (4.1-9) may be approximated
by
H(vz,Vy) = Ho exp [пла (v5 + ¥4)], . (4.1-11)
Transfer Function of Free Space
(Fresnel Approximation)
where Но = exp(—jkd). In this approximation, the phase is a quadratic function of
Vz and Vy, as illustrated in Fig. 4.1-12. This approximation is known as the Fresnel
approximation.
|H | amet
| >
и х! vy
их их
Figure 4.1-12 The transfer function of free-space propagation for low spatial frequencies (much
less than 1/2 cycles/mm) has a constant magnitude and a quadratic phase.
The condition of validity of the Fresnel approximation is that the third term in (4.1-
10) is much smaller than т for all 9. This is equivalent to
64d
—_— <! 4.1-12
Dr ( )
If a is the largest radial distance at the output plane, the largest angle 9» = a/d, and
(4.1-12) may be written in the form [see (2.2-18)]
02
Ne <1, (4.1-13)
ay, 4 Fresnel Approximation
Lo Om Condition of Validity
<
a2
da —— Np = VE (4.1-14)
А Fresnel Number
where № is the Fresnel number. For example, if a = 1 cm, d = 100 cm, and А =
0.5 ит, then 9» = 10-2 radian, Nr = 200, and №02 /4 = 5 x 10-3. In this case the
Fresnel approximation is applicable.

122 CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
Input-Output Relation
Given the input function f(z, у), the output function g(a, у) may be determined as
follows: (1) we determine the Fourier transform
Co
F(vz, Vy) = Г] f(x,y) exp 121 (и.х + vyy)| ах dy, (4.1-15)
—oo
which represents the complex envelopes of the plane-wave components at the input
plane; (2) the product H(vz, vy) F (vz, м) gives the complex envelopes of the plane-
wave components at the output plane; and (3) the complex amplitude at the output
plane is the sum of the contributions of these plane waves,
CO
g(x,y) = // H(vz, Vy) F(z, Vy) exp[—J2m (Vex + vyy)| амьАму. (4.1-16)
—0oo
Using the Fresnel approximation for H(v,, 1%), which is given by (4.1-11), we have
g(x,y) = Ho еб Vy) exp [пла (vz + и] exp [-72т (их + Vyy)| ам, dvy.
—oo
(4.1-17)
Equations (4.1-17) and (4.1-15) serve to relate the output function g(x, у) to the input
function f(x, у).
C. Impulse Response Function of Free Space
The impulse response function h(x, у) of the system of free-space propagation is the
response g(x, у) when the input f(x, у) is a point at the origin (0,0). It is the inverse
Fourier transform of the transfer function H(v,, v,). Using the results of Sec. A.3 and
Table A.1-1 of Appendix A, together with К = 2” /Л, the inverse Fourier transform of
(4.1-11) turns out to be
24 72
h(a, у) = ho exp ie] , (4.1-18)
2d Impulse Response Function
Free Space (Fresnel Approximation)
where ho = (j/Ad) exp(—jkd). This function is proportional to the complex ampli-
tude at the z = d plane of a paraboloidal wave centered about the origin (0,0) [see
(2.2-17)]. Thus, each point at the input plane generates a paraboloidal wave; all such
waves are superimposed at the output plane.
Free-Space Propagation as a Convolution
An alternative procedure for relating complex amplitudes f(x,y) and g(x,y) is to
regard f(a, у) as a superposition of different points (delta functions), each producing a
paraboloidal wave. The wave originating at the point (17, y’) has an amplitude f(z’, у')

4.1 PROPAGATION OF LIGHT INFREE SPACE 123
and is centered about (2’, у’) so that it generates a wave with amplitude f(z’, y’)h(a —
x',y — у’) at the point (x, у) at the output plane. The sum of these contributions is the
two-dimensional convolution

Co
glu) = ff Ману нуу) ay, (4.1-19)
—Co
which, in the Fresnel approximation, becomes
/\2 /\2
‚ху -
g(x,y) = ho И] [(т’, У) exp [jn da’ dy’, | (4.1-20)
—©
where ho = (7/Ла) exp(—jkd).

In summary: within the Fresnel approximation, there are two approaches to deter-
mining the complex amplitude g(, у) at the output plane, given the complex amplitude
f(a, у) at the input plane: (1) Equation (4.1-20) is based on a space-domain approach
in which the input wave is expanded in terms of paraboloidal elementary waves; and
(2) Equation (4.1-17) is a frequency-domain approach in which the input wave is
expanded as a sum of plane waves.
НИ
EXERCISE 4.1-2
Gaussian Beams Revisited. If the function f(z, y) = Aexp[—(x? + y?)/W@] represents the
complex amplitude of an optical wave U(x, y,z) in the plane z = 0, show that 0 (5х, у, 2) is the
Gaussian beam displayed in (3.1-7). Use both space- and frequency-domain methods.
НИ
О. Huygens—Fresnel Principle
The Huygens-Fresnel principle states that each point on a wavefront generates a
spherical wave (Fig. 4.1-13). The envelope of these secondary waves constitutes a new
wavefront. Their superposition constitutes the wave in another plane. The system’s
impulse response function for propagation between the planes z = 0 and z = d is

1
h(a, у) < —exp(—jkr), r= /a2+y24+d?. (4.1-21)

r

x
| Spherical wave \
— \\ | | Figure 4.1-13 The Huygens—
® 1 Mh) NY Fresnel principle. Each point on
о. :!\ a wavefront generates а spherical
~ wave.
y Wavefront

Wavefront

In the paraxial approximation, the spherical wave given by (4.1-21) is approximated
by the paraboloidal wave in (4.1-18) (see Sec. 2.2B). Our derivation of the impulse
response function is therefore consistent with the Huygens—Fresnel principle.

124 — СНАРТЕВ4 FOURIER OPTICS
4.2 OPTICAL FOURIER TRANSFORM

As has been shown in Sec. 4.1, the propagation of light in free space is described
conveniently by Fourier analysis. If the complex amplitude of a monochromatic wave
of wavelength Л in the z = 0 plane is а function f(x,y) composed of harmonic
components of different spatial frequencies, each harmonic component corresponds
to a plane wave: the plane wave traveling at angles 0, = sin! Av,, 0, = эт | Avy
corresponds to the components with spatial frequencies и, and и, and has an ampli-
tude F'(vz, vy), the Fourier transform of f(x,y). This suggests that light can be used
to compute the Fourier transform of a two-dimensional function f(x,y), simply by
making a transparency with amplitude transmittance f(x, у) through which a uniform
plane wave of unity magnitude is transmitted.

Because each of the plane waves has an infinite extent and therefore overlaps with
the other plane waves, however, it is necessary to find a method of separating these
waves. It will be shown that at a sufficiently large distance, only a single plane wave
contributes to the total amplitude at each point at the output plane, so that the Fourier
components are eventually separated naturally. A more practical approach is to use a
lens to focus each of the plane waves into a single point, as described subsequently.
A. Fourier Transform in the Far Field
We now proceed to show that if the propagation distance d is sufficiently long, the
only plane wave that contributes to the complex amplitude at a point (x,y) at the
output plane is the wave with direction making angles 0, = x/d and 6, = y/d with
the optical axis (see Fig. 4.2-1). This is the wave with wavevector components К, =
(x/d)k and К, = (y/d)k and amplitude F\(v,, vy) with vy, = x/Ad and vy = х/Ла.
The complex amplitudes g(x, у) and f(x, у) of the wave at the z = d and z = 0 planes
are related by

у
g(x,y) © ho Е (с). (4.2-1)
Free-Space Propagation as Fourier
Transform (Fraunhofer Approximation)
where F'(v,, Vy) is the Fourier transform of f(x,y) and ho = (j/Ad) exp(—jkd).
Contributions of all other waves cancel out as a result of destructive interference. This
approximation is known as the Fraunhofer approximation.
* т
b
L
ы en =
flsy) ° “Ee }
x,y о
5
8(X,Y)
Figure 4.2-1 When the distance d is sufficiently long, the complex amplitude at point (5, y) in
the z = d plane is proportional to the complex amplitude of the plane-wave component with angles
9, = a/d = Ли, and 0, = y/d = Avy, ie., to the Fourier transform F'(v,, vy) of f(x,y), with
v, = x/rd andy, = y/Ad.

4.2 OPTICAL FOURIER TRANSFORM 125

As noted in the following proofs, the conditions of validity of Fraunhofer approxi-
mation are:

Np <1 and Np <1. (4.2-2)

Fraunhofer Approximation

Condition of Validity

Np = a?/Ad, №, = b?/Ad

The Fraunhofer approximation is therefore valid whenever the Fresnel numbers Np

and №; are small. The Fraunhofer approximation is more difficult to satisfy than the

Fresnel approximation, which requires that М0, /4 < 1 [see (4.1-13)]. Since 9 < 1

in the paraxial approximation, it is possible to satisfy the Fresnel condition №02 /4 <
1 for Fresnel numbers Np not necessarily < 1.

С Proofs of the Fourier Transform Property of Free-Space Propagation in the Fraunhofer
Approximation. We begin with the relation between g(x, у) and } (т, у) in (4.1-20). The phase in the
argument of the exponent is (7/Ad)[(a—2’)? + (y—y')?] = (п/ла) (2? +y?) + («+ у?) —2(aa! +
у). If f(x,y) is confined to a small area of radius b, and if the distance d is sufficiently large so
that the Fresnel number №, = b?/Ad is small, then the phase factor (7/Ad)(x’? + у?) < 1(b?/Ad)
is negligible and (4.1-20) may be approximated by

2 2 rs / /
g(x, у) = ho exp jn f(z’, y') exp jon dx’ dy’. (4.2-3)
Ad Ad
The factors x/Ad and y/Ad may be regarded as the frequencies и, = x/Ad and и, = y/Ad, so that
22 + y? x у

ЕВ И Е в. ), 4.2-4
9(т,у) vex (<a Xd ) Xd? dd (4.2-4)
where F'(v,,, ¥,) is the Fourier transform of f (x, у). The phase factor given by exp[—j7(x?+y”)/Ad]
in (4.2-4) may also be neglected and (4.2-1) obtained if we also limit our interest to points at the output
plane within a circle of radius a centered about the z-axis so that (a? + y?)/Ad < ma?/Ad < т.

This is applicable when the Fresnel number № = a?/Ad < 1.

Another proof is based on (4.1-17), which expresses the complex amplitude g(, у) as an integral
of plane waves of different frequencies. If d is sufficiently large so that the phase in the integrand is
much greater than 27, it can be shown using the method of stationary phase’ that only one value of
Vv, contributes to the integral. This is the value for which the derivative of the phase пла? —2ли,х
with respect to и, vanishes; 1.е., и, = «/Ad. Similarly, the only value of и, that contributes to the
integral is и, = y/Ad. This proves the assertion that only one plane wave contributes to the far field
at a given point. a
ee
EXERCISE 4.2-1
Conditions of Validity of the Fresnel and Fraunhofer Approximations: A Comparison.
Demonstrate that the Fraunhofer approximation is more restrictive than the Fresnel approximation
by taking Л = 0.5 jum, and assuming that the object points lie within a circular aperture of radius
b = 1 cm and the observation points lie within a circular aperture of radius a = 2 cm. Determine
the range of distances d between the object plane and the observation plane for which each of these
approximations is applicable.
ee

1 See, e.g., М. Born and Е. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University Press, 7th expanded and corrected
ed. 2002, Appendix III.

126 — СНАРТЕВ4А FOURIER OPTICS
Summary
In the Fraunhofer approximation, the complex amplitude g(x,y) of a wave of
wavelength А in the = = d plane is proportional to the Fourier transform F'(v,, Vy)
of the complex amplitude f(x,y) in the z = 0 plane, evaluated at the spatial
frequencies и, = х/Ла and vy = у/Ла. The approximation is valid if f(x, у) at
the input plane is confined to a circle of radius b satisfying b?/Ad < 1, and at
points at the output plane within a circle of radius a satisfying a?/\d < 1.
B. Fourier Transform Using a Lens
The plane-wave components that constitute a wave may also be separated by use of a
lens. A thin spherical lens transforms a plane wave into a paraboloidal wave focused
to a point in the lens focal plane (see Sec. 2.4 and Exercise 2.4-3). If the plane wave
arrives at small angles 6, and 6,, the paraboloidal wave is centered about the point
(0.f,0,f), where f is the focal length (see Fig. 4.2-2). The lens therefore maps each
direction (9,,6,) into a single point (0, f,6,f) in the focal plane and thus separates
the contributions of the different plane waves.
КМ v= Oxf Figure 4.2-2 Focusing of a plane
wave into a point. А direction
> (9.,0,) is mapped into а point
< (x,y) = (60,f,0,f). (see Exer-
Ox Focal cise 2.4-3.)
“7 plane
- JK |
In reference to the optical system shown in Fig. 4.2-3, let f(x,y) be the complex
amplitude of the optical wave in the z = 0 plane. Light is decomposed into plane
waves, with the wave traveling at small angles 09, = Ли, and 9, = Av, having
a complex amplitude proportional to the Fourier transform F'(v,, у). This wave is
focused by the lens into a point (zx, у) in the focal plane where х = 6,f = Afr,
and у = 0,f = Afvy. The complex amplitude at point (x,y) at the output plane is
therefore proportional to the Fourier transform of f(x, у) evaluated at и, = «/Af and
и, = y/Af, so that
т у
ину хр (Ss), (4.2-5)
To determine the proportionality factor in (4.2-5), we analyze the input function
f(x,y) into its Fourier components and trace the plane wave corresponding to each
component through the optical system. We then superpose the contributions of these
waves at the output plane to obtain g(x,y). Assuming that these waves are paraxial
and using the Fresnel approximation, we obtain:
_ (2? +y?)(d—f) cy
g(x,y) = мехр Lis XP? F Wore)’ (4.2-6)

4.2 OPTICAL FOURIER TRANSFORM 127
* g(xy)
AUN \ CCC fir: 0 (x,y) = Oxf Of)
Ц we г
Focal plane
y
< =
Figure 4.2-3 Focusing of the plane waves associated with the harmonic Fourier components of the
input function f(x, у) into points in the focal plane. The amplitude of the plane wave with direction
(9,0) = (Avz, Avy) is proportional to the Fourier transform F'(v,,, vy) and is focused at the point
(2,4) = Oxf, Of) = Afve,Afry).-
where h; = Hoho = (7/Af) exp[—jk(d + f)]. Thus, the coefficient of proportionality
in (4.2-5) contains a phase factor that is a quadratic function of x and y.
Since || = 1/Af it follows from (4.2-6) that the optical intensity at the output
plane is
1 ху 2
т, у) = a5 (5% i) , (4.2-7)
(Af)? ХА
The intensity of light at the output plane (the back focal plane of the lens) is therefore
proportional to the absolute-squared value of the Fourier transform of the complex
amplitude of the wave at the input plane, regardless of the distance d.
The phase factor in (4.2-6) vanishes if а = f, so that
x
ГА Fourier-Transform
Property of a Lens
where № = (j/Af)exp(—j2kf). In this geometry, known as the 2-f system (see
Fig. 4.2-4), the complex amplitudes at the front and back focal planes of the lens are
related by a Fourier transform, both magnitude and phase.
ы | #(х,у) Figure 4.2-4 The 2-f system. The
PRY) хбр Fourier component of f(x,y) with
N КАМ ох. spatial frequencies и, and и, gener-
ates a plane wave at angles 0, =
> Av, and 9, = Avy and is focused
Focal by the lens to the point (x,y) =
— plane (10.,10,) = (Afvs,Afvy) so that
9х =7 g(x,y) is proportional to the Fourier
—— f —>— f —| transform F(a/Af,y/Af).

128 CHAPTER 4 FOURIER OPTICS

Summary

The complex amplitude of light at a point (т, у) in the back focal plane of a lens of

focal length f is proportional to the Fourier transform of the complex amplitude in

the front focal plane evaluated at the frequencies и, = x/Af, v,/Af. This relation

is valid in the Fresnel approximation. Without the lens, the Fourier transformation

is obtained only in the Fraunhofer approximation, which is more restrictive.

[] *Proof of the Fourier Transform Property of the Lens in the Fresnel Approximation. The
proof takes the following four steps.

1. The plane wave with angles 0, = Av, and 6, = Av, has a complex amplitude U(x, y,0) =
F (vz, Vy) exp[—j2a(v,x + Vyy)] in the z = 0 plane and U(2,y,d) = H(vz, Vy) F (V2, Vy)
exp[—j2a(v,x + vyy)| in the z = а plane, immediately before crossing the lens, where
H(v2,Vy) = Ho expljaAd(vz + и] is the transfer function of a distance d of free space
and Но = exp(—jkd).

2. Upon crossing the lens, the complex amplitude is multiplied by the lens phase factor
exp[ja(a? + y”)/Af] [the phase factor exp(—jkA), where A is the width of the lens, has
been ignored]. Thus,

U(x,y,d +A) = Ho exp [jn(a? + y”)/Af] (42-9)
x exp [jmAd (v2 + v5) | F (vz, Vy) exp [—j2m(v,2 + vyy)] - ,
This expression is simplified by writing —2v,7+27/Af = (2? -2v,Afx)/Af = [(~—2x9)? =
x|/Af, with xo = Av, f; a similar relation for у is written with yp = Av, f, so that
_ 2 _ 2
U(x,y,d +A) = A(v,, vy) exp [jn eer wr) (4.2-10)
where
A(z, Vy) = Ho exp [jaA(d — f) (UE + ¥5)| F(ve, vy): (4.2-11)
Equation (4.2-10) is recognized as the complex amplitude of a paraboloidal wave converging
toward the point (10, yo) in the lens focal plane, z = 4 +A + f.

3. We now examine the propagation in the free space between the lens and the output plane to
determine U(x, у, 4+ А + }). We apply (4.1-20) to (4.2-10), use the relation [ exp[j2m(a —
то)’ / АЛ] dx’ = Af d(x — xo), and obtain
where ho = (j/Af) exp(—jkf). Indeed, the plane wave is focused into a single point at 10 =
Аи» and yo = Avy f.

4. The last step is to integrate over all the plane waves (all v, and и). By virtue of the sifting
property of the delta function, 0( — хо) = 6(a — Ари.) = (1/Af)O(vz — &/Af), this integral
gives g(x,y) = hoA(a/Af, y/Af). Substituting from (4.2-11) we finally obtain (4.2-6). №

ee
EXERCISE 4.2-2

The Inverse Fourier Transform. In the single-lens optical system depicted in Fig. 4.2-4, the
field distribution in the front focal plane (2 = 27) is a scaled version of the Fourier transform of the
field distribution in the back focal plane (z = 0). Verify that if the coordinate system in the front
focal plane is inverted, 1.е., (x, y) + (—, —y), then the resultant field distribution yields the inverse
Fourier transform.
НИ

43 DIFFRACTION OF LIGHT 129
4.3 DIFFRACTION OF LIGHT

When an optical wave is transmitted through an aperture in an opaque screen and

travels some distance in free space, its intensity distribution is called the diffraction

pattern. If light were treated as rays, the diffraction pattern would be a shadow of the

aperture. Because of the wave nature of light, however, the diffraction pattern may

deviate slightly or substantially from the aperture shadow, depending on the distance

between the aperture and observation plane, the wavelength, and the dimensions of

the aperture. An example is illustrated in Fig. 4.3-1. It is difficult to determine exactly

the manner in which the screen modifies the incident wave, but the propagation in

free space beyond the aperture is always governed by the laws described earlier in this
chapter.

wh Figure 4.3-1 Diffraction pattern of the teeth of

Hs wy ь . а saw. (Adapted from М. Cagnet, М. Francon, and

Е } J. С. Thrierr, Atlas of Optical Phenomena, Springer-

Verlag, 1962.)

The simplest theory of diffraction is based on the assumption that the incident wave
is transmitted without change at points within the aperture, but is reduced to zero at
points on the back side of the opaque part of the screen. If U(x, у) and f(x,y) are
the complex amplitudes of the wave immediately to the left and right of the screen
(Fig. 4.3-2), respectively, then in accordance with this assumption,

f(x,y) = U(x, у) p(x, y), (4.3-1)
where
1 inside the aperture
P(t Y) = [6 outside the aperture (4.3-2)
is called the aperture function.
|
> d Figure 4.3-2 A wave U(a,y) is
U(x,y) —— Observation transmitted through an aperture of
— | plane amplitude transmittance р(т, у), gen-
(ху) erating а wave of complex am-
plitude f(x,y) = U(a«,y)p(2,y).
After propagation a distance d in
у “Apert (x,y) free space, the complex amplitude is
plane g(x,y) and the diffraction pattern is
< the intensity I(a, y) = |g(x, y)|°.

Given f(x,y), the complex amplitude g(a, y) at an observation plane a distance d
from the screen may be determined using the methods described in Secs. 4.1 and 4.2.
The diffraction pattern I(x, y) = |g(x,y)|? is known as Fraunhofer diffraction or

130 — CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
Fresnel diffraction, depending on whether free-space propagation is described using
the Fraunhofer approximation or the Fresnel approximation, respectively.

Although this approach gives reasonably accurate results in most cases, it is not
exact. The validity and self-consistency of the assumption that the complex amplitude
f(x,y) vanishes at points outside the aperture on the back of the screen are question-
able since the transmitted wave propagates in all directions and therefore reaches those
points as well. A theory of diffraction based on the exact solution of the Helmholtz
equation under the boundary conditions imposed by the aperture is mathematically
difficult. Only a few geometrical structures have yielded exact solutions. However,
different theories of diffraction have been developed using a variety of assumptions,
leading to results with varying accuracies. Rigorous diffraction theory is beyond the
scope of this book.

A. Fraunhofer Diffraction

Fraunhofer diffraction is the theory of transmission of light through apertures, as-
suming that the incident wave is multiplied by the aperture function and that the
Fraunhofer approximation determines the propagation of light in the free space beyond
the aperture. The Fraunhofer approximation is valid if the propagation distance d
between the aperture and observation planes is sufficiently large so that the Fresnel
number Nj, = b?/Ad < 1, where 6 is the largest radial distance within the aperture.

Assuming that the incident wave is a plane wave of intensity J; traveling in the
= direction so that U(x,y) = VJ;, then f(x,y) = VJ; p(x, у). In the Fraunhofer
approximation [see (4.2-1)],

т у

yx Vih P(—.4), 4.3-3
9(т,у) УБР (55 +5g (4.3-3)

where бо
P(vz, Vy) = // p(x, у) exp [j2m (vex + vyy)] dx dy (4.3-4)

—с©
is the Fourier transform of p(x,y) and ho = (j/Ad)exp(—jkd). The diffraction

pattern is therefore
I; х yi?

I(a, = 35 [P(5-55)| 4.3-5
(9) = паз Pad 935)

In summary: the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern at the point (x,y) is proportional
to the squared magnitude of the Fourier transform of the aperture function p(z, у)
evaluated at the spatial frequencies и, = x/Ad and и, = y/Ad.
НИ
EXERCISE 4.3-1
Fraunhofer Diffraction from a Rectangular Aperture. Verify that the Fraunhofer diffrac-
tion pattern from a rectangular aperture, of height and width D, and D, respectively, observed at a
distance d is

пан = Iy sine SE") ми ; (4.3-6)
where I, = (D,D,/Ad)? I; is the peak intensity and sinc(x) = sin(wx)/(ma). Verify that the first

4.3 DIFFRACTION OF LIGHT 131
zeros of this pattern occur at х = tAd/D, and у = +Ad/D,, so that the angular divergence of the
diffracted light is given by

А А
9. = — 9, = —. 4.3-7
| |
If Dy < D,, the diffraction pattern is wider in the у direction than in the x direction, as illustrated in
Fig. 4.3-3.
Diffraction
pattern 5
x =
ager | aa 10, у)
aN
+ °
Dx
_ у а
Dy an 0 у
|
Figure 4.3-3 Fraunhofer diffraction from a rectangular aperture. The central lobe of the pattern
has half-angular widths 0, = /D, and 0, = X/Dy.
EXERCISE 4.3-2
Fraunhofer Diffraction from a Circular Aperture. Verify that the Fraunhofer diffraction
pattern from a circular aperture of diameter D (Fig. 4.3-4) is
2.Л (пОр/ла)]*
I = I, | —.——— = Vr? + у? 4.3-8
(x,y) al =Dp/Ad 5 p=Vr +y?, (4.3-8)
where I, = (п? /4ла)?Т, is the peak intensity and J,(-) is the Bessel function of order 1. The
Fourier transform of circularly symmetric functions is discussed in Appendix A, Sec. A.3. The
circularly symmetric pattern (4.3-8), known as the Airy pattern, consists of a central disk surrounded
by rings. Verify that the radius of the central disk, known as the Airy disk, is р; = 1.22Ad/D and
subtends an angle
А
9 = 1.22—. (4.3-9)
р Airy Disk Half Angle
Diffraction
pattern at
x 2 Кр)
Aperture | 277” 7
2777 ~ 6
— >
y d
Dd ae 0 Р
Figure 4.3-4 The Fraunhofer diffraction pattern from a circular aperture produces the Airy pattern
with the radius of the central disk subtending an angle 9 = 1.22X/D.
ee

132 — CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
The Fraunhofer approximation is valid for distances d that are usually extremely
large. It is satisfied, for example, in applications of long-distance free-space optical
communications such as laser radar (lidar) and satellite communications. However, as
shown in Sec. 4.2B, if a lens of focal length f is used to focus the diffracted light,
the intensity pattern in the focal plane is proportional to the squared magnitude of the
Fourier transform of p(x, у) evaluated at и, = x/Af and и, = у/Л;. The observed
pattern is therefore identical to that obtained from (4.3-5), with the distance d replaced
by the focal length f.
[|
EXERCISE 4.3-3
Spot Size of a Focused Optical Beam. A beam of light is focused using a lens of focal length
f with a circular aperture of diameter D (Fig. 4.3-5). If the beam is approximated by a plane wave at
points within the aperture, verify that the pattern of the focused spot is
2S, (mDp/Af) |?
I =], |r | = Мур, 43-1
(x, y) =Dp|Mf р= =? +у (4.3-10)
where J, is the peak intensity. Compare the radius of the focused spot,
р = eee (4.3-11)
D )
to the spot size obtained when a Gaussian beam of waist radius Wo is focused by ап ideal lens of
infinite aperture [see (3.2-15)].
Aperture f — Diffraction
pattern
Lens
Figure 4.3-5 Focusing of a
plane wave transmitted through a
Tre у circular aperture of diameter Г).
y ;® №
| Ps =1.22А/
vy af eye
ТТТ
*B. Fresnel Diffraction
The theory of Fresnel diffraction is based on the assumption that the incident wave is
multiplied by the aperture function p(x, y) and propagates in free space in accordance
with the Fresnel approximation. If the incident wave is a plane wave traveling in the
z-direction with intensity Г, the complex amplitude immediately after the aperture is
f(x,y) = Vii p(2, у). Using (4.1-20), the diffraction pattern I(x, y) = |g(a, y)|? ata
distance d is
ii (2/2 + уу? |
I; хх) (у-у
I(2,y) = — > x,y’) exp | | dr’ dy'| .
(x,y) cts [] ‚У ехр |—J Xd y
—с
(4.3-12)

4.3 DIFFRACTIONOFLIGHT 133

It is convenient to normalize all distances using V Ad as a unit of distance, so that
X = 2/VAd and X’ = х'/УЛа are the normalized distances (and similarly for у
and у’). Equation (4.3-12) then gives

оо 2

(X,Y) =1, ] | р(Х', У exp {jm [(Х — X")? + (У У] ax’ = |

—с
(4.3-13)

The integral in (4.3-13) is the convolution of p(X, У) and exp[—ja(X? + У?)].
The real and imaginary parts of exp(—jaX7), cos 7X? and sin 7X”, respectively, are
plotted in Fig. 4.3-6. They oscillate at an increasing frequency and their first lobes lie in
the intervals |X| < 1/./2 and |X| < 1, respectively. The total area under the function
exp(—jaX7) is 1, with the main contribution to the area coming from the first few
lobes, since subsequent lobes cancel out. If a is the radius of the aperture, the radius
of the normalized function p(X, У) is a/WAd. The result of the convolution, which
depends on the relative size of the two functions, is therefore governed by the Fresnel
number Np = а?/Ла.

cos 1X2 sin 7X2
| VV 0 УВ = о 1 2 3х
| —1 —1-
Figure 4.3-6 The real and imaginary parts of exp(—j7X°).

If the Fresnel number is large, the normalized width of the aperture а/ У Ad is much
greater than the width of the main lobe, and the convolution yields approximately
the wider function p(X, У). Under this condition the Fresnel diffraction pattern is a
shadow of the aperture, as would be expected from ray optics. Note that ray optics
is applicable in the limit Л — 0, which corresponds to the limit Np — oo. In the
opposite limit, when № is small, the Fraunhofer approximation becomes applicable
and the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern is obtained.

EXAMPLE 4.3-1. Fresnel Diffraction from а Slit. | Assume that the aperture is a slit of
width D = 2a, so that p(a,y) = 1 when |x| < a, and 0 elsewhere. The normalized coordinate
Х =2/Vdd and
a
1 X|< ——==V/N,
P(X,Y) = ‚ As ула г (4.3-14)
0, elsewhere,
where Ne = a?/Ad is the Fresnel number. Substituting into (4.3-13), we obtain (X,Y) =
I;\g(X)|?, where
УМ Х+УМ№
9(Х) -/ exp [—ja(X — Х’)?] dx’ - | exp(—ja.X"”) dX’. (4.3-15)
—УМ№ Х-У№

134 — CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
This integral is usually written in terms of the Fresnel integrals
"ra? "| па?
C(x) = | соз—— аа, S(x)= | sin da, (4.3-16)
0 2 0 2
which are available in the standard computer mathematical libraries.

The complex function g(X ) may also be evaluated using Fourier-transform techniques. Since g(x)
is the convolution of a rectangular function of width \/Np and exp(—jaX 2), its Fourier transform
G(v,) < sinc(\/Np v,) exp(jav2) (see Table А.1-1 in Appendix A). Thus, 9(Х) may be computed
by determining the inverse Fourier transform of G(v,). If № >> 1, the width of sinc(./ № v,)
is much narrower than the width of the first lobe of exp(j7v?) (see Fig. 4.3-6) so that G(v,) =
sinc(./Np и,) and g(X) is the rectangular function representing the aperture shadow.

The diffraction pattern from a slit is plotted in Fig. 4.3-7 for different Fresnel numbers corre-
sponding to different distances d from the aperture. At very small distances (very large Np), the
diffraction pattern is a perfect shadow of the slit. As the distance increases (Np decreases), the wave
nature of light is exhibited in the form of small oscillations around the edges of the aperture (see also
the diffraction pattern in Fig. 4.3-1). For very small Np, the Fraunhofer pattern described by (4.3-6)
is obtained. This is a sinc function with the first zero subtending an angle \/D = A/2a.

x
oe _ eae e:
2a
Np=101 0.5 Tenn Np= 0.1
x x x x
Np=10 Np=1 Np=0.5 Np=0.1
(b) 2a == eee а
Figure 4.3-7 Fresnel diffraction from a slit of width D = 2a. (a) Shaded area is the geometrical
shadow of the aperture. The dashed line is the width of the Fraunhofer diffracted beam. (6) Diffraction
pattern at four axial positions marked by the arrows in (a) and corresponding to the Fresnel numbers
№ = 10, 1, 0.5, and 0.1. The shaded area represents the geometrical shadow of the slit. The dashed
lines at |a| = (A/D)d represent the width of the Fraunhofer pattern in the far field. Where the dashed
lines coincide with the edges of the geometrical shadow, the Fresnel number Np = а?/Ла = 0.5.
EXAMPLE 4.3-2. Fresnel Diffraction from a Gaussian Aperture. If the aperture func-
tion p(z, у) is the Gaussian function p(x, у) = exp[—(x? + y?)/W6], the Fresnel diffraction equa-
tion (4.3-12) may be evaluated exactly by finding the convolution of exp[—(x? + y”)/W@] with
ho exp[—j7 (a? + y”)/Ad] using, for example, Fourier transform techniques (see Appendix A). The
resultant diffraction pattern is
Wo ? 2? у?
I =I,|\—~ =2—— 4.3-17

(x,y) | ae exp | Wd) | )
where W?(d) = W? + 63d? and 0) = \/7Wo.

The diffraction pattern is a Gaussian function of 1 /е? half-width W(d). For small d, W(d) = Wo;
but as d increases, W(d) increases and approaches W(d) = 9% а when d is sufficiently large for the
Fraunhofer approximation to be applicable, so that the angle subtended by the Fraunhofer diffraction

4.3 DIFFRACTION OF LIGHT 135
pattern is 9. These results are illustrated in Fig. 4.3-8, which is analogous to the illustration in
Fig. 4.3-7 for diffraction from a slit. The wave diffracted from a Gaussian aperture is the Gaussian
beam described in detail in Chapter 3.

x
=A ee
О nee
(a) aE >
№=101 05 DOTS seen nnn №204
x x Xx x
Np=10 Np=l Np=0.5 Np=0.1
(b) af ... а
Figure 4.3-8 Fresnel diffraction pattern for a Gaussian aperture of radius Wo at distances d such
that the parameter (7 /2)W?/)d, which is analogous to the Fresnel number Nf in Fig. 4.3-7, is 10, 1,
0.5, and 0.1. These values correspond to W(d)/Wo = 1.001, 1.118, 1.414, and 5.099, respectively.
The diffraction pattern is Gaussian at all distances.
Summary
In the order of increasing distance from the aperture, the diffraction pattern is:

1. A shadow of the aperture.

2. A Fresnel diffraction pattern, which is the convolution of the normalized
aperture function with exp[—ja(X? + Y?)].

3. A Fraunhofer diffraction pattern, which is the absolute-squared value of
the Fourier transform of the aperture function. The far field has an angular
divergence proportional to A/D, where Г) is the diameter of the aperture.

Fresnel Diffraction from a Periodic Aperture: The Talbot Effect
Fresnel diffraction from a one-dimensional periodic aperture is best described in the
Fourier domain by expanding the aperture function p(x) in a Fourier series. If A
is its period, then the Fourier expansion has frequencies и, = m/A, where т =
0,+1,+2,.... The transfer function of free space (4.1-11), at a distance z, is then

Ho exp (тли?) = Ноехр (jrAzm? / А?) = Ho exp (72пт? 2/21) ‚  (4.3-18)
where z = 2Л2/Л. At z = хх, or multiples thereof, the transfer function is simply
a constant Ho, independent of the harmonic order m. At these specific distances,
then, each of the harmonic functions comprising the aperture function p(x) is mul-
tiplied by the same factor so that the function p(x) is reproduced. This process of
self imaging is known as the Talbot effect, and the distance z; is called the Talbot

136 CHAPTER 4 FOURIER OPTICS
distance. At distances z unequal to multiples of z,, the field is given by U(x, z) =
Ho Sr Cm exp(jma/A) exp (j2mm?z/z,), where the с», are coefficients of the
Fourier series expansion of p(x). The corresponding intensity I(x, z) = |0 (2,2)?
for an opaque screen with parallel slits exhibits a carpet-like pattern, as illustrated in
Fig. 4.3-9.
х4
| Figure 4.3-9 Talbot effect. Fresnel diffraction
pattern from a periodic aperture that takes the form
" | of parallel slits in an otherwise opaque screen.
The pattern is reproduced at distances that are
multiples of the Talbot distance zp. The result has
! | the appearance of a carpet with periodic patterns
in x and z.
0 <т 2<т <
The Talbot effect is also observed for two-dimensional periodic apertures provided that
the period is the same in the x and у directions.
*C. Nondiffracting Waves
In accordance with (4.1-8) and (4.1-9), the transfer function of free-space is exp(—jk.z),
where k, = \/k2 — k2 — k? is a circularly symmetric complex function of kz = k? + №.
Any two input harmonic functions with spatial frequencies for which k7. is the same
thus have the same value of the transfer function. It follows that a function f(a, у) that
is a superposition of harmonic functions, all with the same value of ky and therefore the
same k,, creates a stationary wave U(x, у, =) = f(x,y) exp(—jk,z) that maintains its
transverse distribution, and is therefore nondiffracting, as it travels through free space,
regardless of the distance z. The wavefronts of such a wave are planes orthogonal
to the z axis, and the propagation constant is k,. Nondiffracting optical beams were
considered in Sec. 3.5.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 4.3-3. Two Plane Waves. The function f(x,y) = cos(ax) = }[exp(—jax) +
exp(+jaz)] comprises two harmonic components with spatial angular frequencies К, = +a.
On propagation through free space, each of these components is modified by the same factor
exp(—jk.z), where k, = \/k? — a?. The result is a stationary wave that takes the form 0 (х, у, 2) =
cos(ax) exp(—jk,z), which has a sinusoidal transverse distribution representing the interference
between two oblique plane waves at angles эт” (а/к), as provided by (2.5-7).
EXAMPLE 4.3-4. Four Plane Waves. х
A plane wave traveling in the = direc- =
tion that is modulated by the function ww M7
(ту) = cos(a,x) cos(ayy) results in any
four waves, at angles +sin~'(a,/k,) and ZZ | ntti
+sin~'(a,/k,) with respect to the x and у mo ИИ р 5
axes, respectively. Since the quantity k?, = We
a’, + a% is the same for all four waves, so A
too is К, = ./k?—k#. The outcome at К ,
2 is thus the stationary wave U(x,y,z) = Sy) faye <
cos(a,,2) cos(ayy) exp(—jk,z), аз Shown.
EXAMPLE 4.3-5. Infinite Number of Plane Waves. Consider now a function f(x, у) com-
posed of several harmonic functions of angular frequencies К, = kp созф and К, = kr sing, with

4.4 IMAGE FORMATION 137
fixed kp but different ¢. The quantities К? +k? = kp and К. = \/k? — kz are thus the same
for each of these functions. This superposition of waves therefore corresponds to a stationary wave
U(a2,y, z) = f(x,y) exp(—jk-z), no matter how many values of ¢ are included. A limiting case is
the superposition in which a continuum of harmonic functions extends over all angles ¢, which yields
f(x,y) = J", exp(—j kreosd x — j krsing y) 49.

The result is a continuum of plane
waves whose directions form a cone x
of half-angle sin~'(kr/k,). This  _ р
superposition wave is nothing other к
than the Bessel beam U(x, y,z) = АА
21№ (уз + 2) exp (—7К.2) . ГЕРА ;
described in (3.5-4) and illustrated НТ Е
at right. The connection 15 т
explicitly forged via the identity
Г. exp(—jusin Ф) dé = 2”Л (и), NY LR
where Jo(u) is the Bessel function ~jkez
of the first kind and zeroth order. \ Ixy) faye
The plane-wave superposition associated with the Bessel beam may be implemented by making use
of an axicon (see Example 2.4-1 and Sec. 3.5A).
4.4 IMAGE FORMATION
An ideal image formation system is an optical system that replicates the distribution
of light in one plane, the object plane, into another, the image plane. Since the optical
transmission process is never perfect, the image is never an exact replica of the object.
Aside from image magnification, there is also blur resulting from imperfect focusing
and from the diffraction of optical waves. This section is devoted to the description
of image formation systems and their fidelity. Methods of linear systems, such as
the impulse response function and the transfer function (Appendix B), are used to
characterize image formation. A simple ray-optics approach is presented first, then a
treatment based on wave optics is subsequently developed.
A. Ray Optics of a Single-Lens Imaging System
Consider an imaging system using a lens of focal length } at distances d; and 42 from
the object and image planes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4.4-1. When 1/41 -+1/45 =
1/f, the system is focused so that paraxial rays emitted from each point in the object
plane reach a single corresponding point in the image plane. Within the ray theory of
light, the imaging is “ideal,” with each point of the object producing a single point of
the image. The impulse response function of the system is an impulse function.
Lens

Object

Figure 4.4-1 Rays in a focused

Image imaging system.
= Л <«— f—>
| a 5. a,

138 — CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
Suppose now that the system is not in focus, as illustrated in Fig. 4.4-2, and assume
that the focusing error is
1 1 1
e=—+—- >. (4.4-1)
dq, 42 f Focusing Error
A point in the object plane generates a patch of light in the image plane that is a shadow
of the lens aperture. The distribution of this patch is the system’s impulse response
function. For simplicity, we shall consider an object point lying on the optical axis and
determine the distribution of light h(x, у) it generates in the image plane.
x h у
, | | (xy)
— в
ae
A(x, у)
|
= 4}, + Ps 7
Е Го ———_______ > И dy >| x
(a) (b)
Figure 4.4-2 (a) Rays in a defocused imaging system. (b) The impulse response function of an
imaging system with a circular aperture of diameter D is a circle of radius р, = ed2D/2, where Е is
the focusing error.

Assume that the plane of the focused image lies at a distance d2, satisfying the
imaging equation 1/d2, + 1/d; = 1/f. The shadow of a point on the edge of the
aperture at a radial distance p is a point in the image plane with radial distance p,
where the ratio ps/p = (doo — 42) /d2 =1- 42 / 450 =1- d2(1/f — 1/а1) =
1 — do(1/dz — €) = ед. If p(x,y) is the aperture function, also called the pupil
function [p(x, у) = 1 for points inside the aperture, and 0 elsewhere], then h(z, у) is
a scaled version of p(x, у) magnified by a factor p,/p = ed, so that

x
h(a, у) xp (=. в.) . (4.4-2)
eda ed» Impulse Response Function
(Ray-Optics)

As an example, a circular aperture of diameter D corresponds to an impulse re-

sponse function confined to a circle of radius
ps = 56420, (4.4-3)
Blur Spot Radius
as illustrated in Fig. 4.4-2. The radius p, of this “blur spot” is an inverse measure of re-
solving power and image quality. A small value of р. means that the system is capable
of resolving fine details. Since р. is proportional to the aperture diameter Г), the image

4.4 IMAGE FORMATION 139
quality may be improved by use of a small aperture. A small aperture corresponds
to a reduced sensitivity of the system to focusing errors, so that it corresponds to an
increased “depth of focus.”

B. Wave Optics of a 4-f Imaging System
Consider now the two-lens imaging system illustrated in Fig. 4.4-3. This system, called
the 4-f system, serves as a focused imaging system with unity magnification, as can be
easily verified by ray tracing.
|< f ———>|«—__ f >< f —_>« —__ f >
x

| Py)

A

|

Object plane Fourier plane Image plane

Figure 4.4-3 The 4-} imaging system. If an inverted coordinate system is used in the image plane,
the magnification is unity.

The analysis of wave propagation through this system becomes simple if we rec-
ognize it as a cascade of two Fourier-transforming subsystems. The first subsystem
(between the object plane and the Fourier plane) performs a Fourier transform, and the
second (between the Fourier plane and the image plane) performs an inverse Fourier
transform since the coordinate system in the image plane is inverted (see Exercise 4.2-
2). As a result, in the absence of an aperture the image is a perfect replica of the object.

Let f(x,y) be the complex amplitude transmittance of a transparency placed in the
object plane and illuminated by a plane wave exp(—jkz) traveling in the z direction,
as illustrated in Fig. 4.4-4, and let g(x, y) be the complex amplitude in the image plane.
The first lens system analyzes f(a, у) into its spatial Fourier transform and separates
its Fourier components so that each point in the Fourier plane corresponds to a single
spatial frequency. These components are then recombined by the second lens system
and the object distribution is perfectly reconstructed.

The 4-f imaging system can be used as a spatial filter in which the image g(x, у) isa
filtered version of the object f(x, у). Since the Fourier components of f (5, y) are avail-
able in the Fourier plane, a mask may be used to adjust them selectively, blocking some
components and transmitting others, as illustrated in Fig. 4.4-5. The Fourier component
of f(a, у) at the spatial frequency (vz, Vy) is located in the Fourier plane at the point
x= АГи,, у = Afvy. To implement a filter of transfer function H(v;, ку), the complex
amplitude transmittance p(x, у) of the mask must be proportional to H(x/Af,y/Af).
Thus, the transfer function of the filter realized by a mask of transmittance p(x, у) is

H(vz, Vy) = D(Afir, AfVy), (4.4-4)

Transfer Function

4-f System

where we have ignored the phase factor j exp(—j2kf) associated with each Fourier

transform operation [the argument of № in (4.2-8)]. The Fourier transforms G(vz, му)
and F'(v,, vy) of g(x,y) and f(x,y) are related by G(v;, vy) = H(vz, Vy) F (V2, Vy).

140 CHAPTER 4 FOURIER OPTICS
Lens у— —7
Fourier plane
x .
| Lens es. 8@ У)
a
Ах, у) _® be Image
er у х Plane
Plane ри
wave b_— f
y
Object oe
plane | „— f
Figure 4.4-4 The 4-/ imaging system performs a Fourier transform followed by an inverse Fourier
transform, so that the image is a perfect replica of the object.
g(x, У)
Lens у— —*
Mask
ee)
Lens
| rN
SY) Kel Image
у x Рае
Plane Fourier и
wave plane be f
y pa
Object 7
plane | _- f
Figure 4.4-5 Spatial filtering. The transparencies in the object and Fourier planes have complex
amplitude transmittances f(x,y) and p(x, у). A plane wave traveling in the z direction is modulated
by the object transparency, Fourier transformed by the first lens, multiplied by the transmittance
of the mask in the Fourier plane, and inverse Fourier transformed by the second lens. As a result,
the complex amplitude in the image plane g(z, у) is a filtered version of f(x,y). The system has a
transfer function H(v,,v,) = p(Afvc, Afvy)-

This is a rather simple result. The transfer function has the same shape as the pupil
function. The corresponding impulse response function h(x, у) is the inverse Fourier
transform of H(vz, Vy),

1 х 9
в(х, у) = ane P MAP)’ (4.4-5)
(Af) Impulse Response Function
4-f System

4.4 IMAGE FORMATION 141
where P(v,, му) is the Fourier transform of p(x, у).
Examples of Spatial Filters
= The ideal circularly symmetric low-pass filter has a transfer function Н(и,, vy) =
lu; + < vz and Н(и,, vy) = 0, otherwise. It passes spatial frequencies that
are smaller than the cutoff frequency и, and blocks higher frequencies. This filter
is implemented by a mask in the form of a circular aperture of diameter D, with
D/2 = в, А}. For example, if D = 2 ст, A = 1 р, and } = 100 cm, the cutoff
frequency (spatial bandwidth) и, = D/2Af = 10 lines/mm. This filter eliminates
spatial frequencies that are greater than 10 lines/mm, so that the smallest size of
discernible detail in the filtered image is approximately 0.1 mm.
= The high-pass filter is the complement of the low-pass filter. It blocks low fre-
quencies and transmits high frequencies. The mask is a clear transparency with
an opaque central circle. The filter output is high at regions of large rate of
change and small at regions of smooth or slow variation of the object. The filter
is therefore useful for edge enhancement in image-processing applications.
= The vertical-pass filter blocks horizontal frequencies and transmits vertical fre-
quencies. Only variations in the x direction are transmitted. If the mask is a
vertical slit of width D, the highest transmitted frequency is и, = (D/2)/Af.
Examples of these filters and their effects on images are illustrated in Fig. 4.4-6.
C. Wave Optics of a Single-Lens Imaging System
We now consider image formation in the single-lens imaging system illustrated in
Fig. 4.4-7, using a wave-optics approach. We first determine the impulse response
function, and then derive the transfer function. These functions are determined by the
defocusing error е, given by (4.4-1), and by the pupil function p(x, у) (the transmit-
tance of the aperture in the lens plane). The pupil function in this single-lens imaging
system plays the same role of the mask function in the 4-} imaging system described
in the previous section.
Impulse Response Function
To determine the impulse response function we consider an object composed of a single
point (an impulse) on the optical axis at the point (0, 0), and follow the emitted optical
wave as it travels to the image plane. The resultant complex amplitude is the impulse
response function h(z, у).
An impulse in the object plane produces in the aperture plane a spherical wave
approximated by [see (4.1-18)]
24,2
U(«,y) = hy exp | jhe У |, (4.4-6)
2d,
where hy = (j/Ad1) exp(—jkd1). Upon crossing the aperture and the lens, U(, у) is
multiplied by the pupil function p(x, у) and the lens quadratic phase factor exp[jk(x?+
y”)/2f], becoming
24 72
uo +y
Ui (x,y) = О(т,у) exp (ak) p(x,y). (4.4-7)

142 CHAPTER 4 FOURIER OPTICS
Object Mask Image

(а) 3 а

(b)

i
Figure 4.4-6 Examples of object, mask, and filtered image for three spatial filters: (a) low-pass
filter; (b) high-pass filter; (c) vertical-pass filter. Black means the transmittance is zero and white
means the transmittance is unity.

x
t—,
—™ a .
U ——_.
| и
| ;
Ul ПТ Figure 4.4-7  Single-lens
Object Г У imaging system.
plane РОУ) Lens
Aperture
plane
Image
x plane
The resultant field 01 (x, у) then propagates in free space a distance dy. In accordance

4.4 IMAGE FORMATION 143
with (4.1-20) it produces the impulse response function
oe 12 12
h(a,y) = he ] fl (2, У) exp [jn da’ ау, (44-8)
where hy = (j/Ad2) exp(—jkd2). Substituting from (4.4-6) and (4.4-7) into (4.4-8)
and casting the integrals as a Fourier transform, we obtain
21.2
. au +У x у
h(a,y) = МВ | Р| ——,—], 4.4-9
(2,9) = In resp ( "ла. ) (saz sr) (148)
where P; (vz, му) is the Fourier transform of the function
Ру
р1(т,у) = p(x, y) exp (-ine =") (4.4-10)
Generalized Pupil Function
known as the generalized pupil function. The factor е is the focusing error given by
(4.4-1).

For a high-quality imaging system, the impulse response function is a narrow func-
tion, extending only over a small range of values of x and y. If the phase factor
n(x? + у?) / 45 in (4.4-9) is much smaller than 1 for all 2 and у within this range,
it can be neglected, so that

h(a, y) = hoPt (= xs) . (4.4-11)

№4» Ad» Impulse Response Function

where ho = hyhz is a constant of magnitude (1/Ad))(1/Ad2). It follows that the

system’s impulse response function is proportional to the Fourier transform of the
generalized pupil function p; (x, у) evaluated at и, = х/Ла2 and vy = у/Ла2.

If the system is focused (€ = 0), then pi (x, у) = р(х, у), and

т у
h = hopP| — ,—— 4.4-12
where P(v,, му) is the Fourier transform of p(x, y). This result is similar to the corre-
sponding result in (4.4-5) for the 4-f system.
EXAMPLE 4.4-1. Impulse Response Function of a Focused Imaging System with
a Circular Aperture. If the aperture is a circle of diameter D so that р(т,у) = lif p =
Vx? + у? < D/2, and zero otherwise, then the impulse response function is
_ 2.Л (®Ор/Ла>) —_ 5 5 .
and |h(0,0)| = (пр? /4^2 4, 45). This is a circularly symmetric function whose cross section is
shown in Fig. 4.4-8. It drops to zero at a radius
— 122,22 (4.4-14)
ps =1. D 4

144 — СНАРТЕВ4 FOURIER OPTICS
and oscillates slightly before it vanishes. The radius р. is therefore a measure of the size of the blur
circle. If the system is focused at со, then 41 = со and dy = f, so that
ps =1.22Fy, (4.4-15)
Spot Radius
where Fy = f/D is the lens F'-number. Thus, systems of smaller Fy (larger apertures) have better
image quality. This assumes, of course, that the larger lens does not introduce geometrical aberrations.
xX
а
ee dh hy)
U ane
| | и
y 4
ИИ
— 0
РЕ dy °
xX
Figure 4.4-8 Impulse response function of an imaging system with a circular aperture.
Transfer Function
The transfer function of a linear system can only be defined when the system is shift
invariant (see Appendix B). Evidently, the single-lens imaging system is not shift
invariant since a shift A of a point in the object plane is accompanied by a different
shift МА in the image plane, where М = —d2/d is the magnification.

The image is different from the object in two ways. First, the image is a magnified
replica of the object, i.e., the point (2, у) of the object is located at a new point
(Mx, My) in the image. Second, every point is smeared into a patch as a result of
defocusing or diffraction. We can therefore think of image formation as a cascade of
two systems — a system of ideal magnification followed by a system of blur, as de-
picted in Fig. 4.4-9. By its nature, the magnification system is shift-variant. For points
near the optical axis, the blur system is approximately shift invariant and therefore can
be described by a transfer function.

The transfer function H(v,, му) of the blur system is determined by obtaining the
Fourier transform of the impulse response function h(x, y) in (4.4-11). The result is

H(v_, Vy) = pi(Adavz, Adavy), (4.4-16)

Transfer Function

where р1 (5, у) is the generalized pupil function and we have ignored a constant phase
factor exp(—jkd,) exp(—jkd2). If the system is focused, then

H(vz, Vy) = p(Adgvz, Adavy), (4.4-17)

where p(x, у) is the pupil function. This result is identical to that obtained for the 4-f

imaging system [see (4.4-4)]. If the aperture is a circle of diameter D, for example,

4.4 IMAGE FORMATION 145
x
(a) 7
У
x x
() > у
y
x x
Figure 4.4-9 The imaging system in (a) is regarded in (b) as a combination of an ideal imaging
system with only magnification, followed by shift-invariant blur in which each point is blurred into a
patch with a distribution equal to the impulse response function.
then the transfer function is constant within a circle of radius v,, where
D
Vv. = —— 4.4-18
== Эа, ( )
and vanishes elsewhere, as illustrated in Fig. 4.4-10.
Xx
Po,
——~ Me Но, Vy)
| О
[ ‚
у И
и
ТУ |
и
к и?
> р их
xX
Figure 4.4-10 Transfer function of a focused imaging system with a circular aperture of diameter
р. The system has a spatial bandwidth и, = D/2Ad2.
If the lens is focused at infinity, 1.е., 45 = f,
1
# Spatial Bandwidth
where Fy = f /D is the lens F'-number. For example, for an F’-2 lens (Fy = f/D =
2) and for A = 0.5 wm, и. = 500 lines/mm. The frequency и. is the spatial bandwidth,
1.е., the highest spatial frequency that the imaging system can transmit.

146 CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
D. Near-Field Imaging
It was shown in Sec. 4.1B that the spatial bandwidth of light propagating in free space
at a wavelength Л is \~! cycles/mm. Fourier components of the object distribution
with spatial frequencies greater than \~! lead to evanescent waves that decay rapidly
and diminish at distances from the object plane of the order of a wavelength, so that
object features smaller than a wavelength cannot be transmitted. Moreover, it was
shown in Sec. 4.4C that an imaging system using a lens with a specified Fy has an
impulse response function whose radius is 1.22 Fy, so that points separated by a
distance smaller than 1.22F'y cannot be discriminated [see Fig. 4.4-11(a)]. Another
imaging modality that makes use of a laser beam focused by a lens to scan an object, as
depicted in Fig. 4.4-11(b), behaves similarly. The resolution of this system is dictated
by the size of the focused spot, which has a radius of 1.22\F4, as was shown in
Example 4.4-1. In both of these cases, therefore, object details with dimensions much
smaller than a wavelength are washed out in the scanned image. This fundamental limit
on the resolution of image-formation systems is referred to as the diffraction limit.
+ r
_ rane 1 Focused Aperture | . +
M | ne м
_) _) т
AY
‘ ВЫ Image Illumination Object Гоа WV Object
Object (a) (Б) (с)
Figure 4.4-11 Ina single-lens imaging system, the subwavelength spatial details of an object are
washed out (a) in an image formed by a single lens, or (b) by making use of a focused laser-scanning
system. (c) On the other hand, a scanning imaging system that makes use of illumination transmitted
through a subwavelength aperture preserves the subwavelength details of the object, provided that the
object plane is placed at a subwavelength distance from the aperture plane.

The diffraction limit may be circumvented, however. Light can be localized to a
spot with dimensions much smaller than a wavelength, within a single plane. The
difficulty is that the evanescent waves fully decay a short distance away from that
plane, whereupon the spot diverges and acquires a size that exceeds the wavelength.
At yet greater distances, the wave ultimately becomes a spherical wave. Hence, the
diffraction limit can be circumvented if the object is illuminated in the very vicinity of
the subwavelength spot, before the beam waist has an opportunity to grow. This may
be implemented in a scanning configuration by passing the illumination beam through
an aperture of diameter much smaller than a wavelength, as depicted in Fig. 4.4-11(c).
The object is placed at a distance from the aperture that is usually less than half the
diameter of the aperture so that the beam illuminates a subwavelength-size area of the
object. Upon transmission through the object, the traveling components of the wave
form a spherical wave whose amplitude is proportional to the object transmittance at
the location of the spot illumination. The resolution of this imaging system is therefore
of the order of the aperture size, which is much smaller than the wavelength. An image
is constructed by raster-scanning the illuminated aperture across the object and record-
ing the optical response via a conventional far-field imaging system. This technique
is known as near-field optical imaging or scanning near-field optical microscopy
(SNOM). Subwavelength imaging falls in the domain of nanophotonics since the

4.5 HOLOGRAPHY 147
imaging takes place over a subwavelength (nanometer) spatial scale. Other approaches
for achieving subwavelength imaging make use of negative-index and hyperbolic ma-
terials, as considered in Sec. 8.1.

SNOM is typically implemented by sending the illumination light through an optical
fiber with an aluminum-coated tapered tip, as illustrated in Fig. 4.4-12. The light
is guided through the fiber by total internal reflection. As the diameter of the fiber
decreases, the light is guided by reflection from the metallic surface, which acts like
a conical mirror. As the fiber diameter grows yet smaller in the region of the tip, the
wave can no longer be guided (see Sec. 9.1) and becomes evanescent. The distribution
of the illumination wave at, and beyond, the end of the tip is complex and is typically
determined numerically. Aperture diameters and spatial resolutions of the order of
tens of nanometers are usually achieved in SNOM with visible light. Since the tip
of the fiber scans the object at a distance of only a few nanometers, an elaborate
feedback system must be employed to maintain the distance for a specimen of arbitrary
topography. Applications of SNOM include the non-destructive characterization of
inorganic, organic, composite, and biological materials and nanostructures.

Metal Object

coating

Incident a ! |
light м Figure 4.4-12 An optical fiber with a ta-
| pered metal-coated tip for near-field imaging.

q

Tapered } 7

Glass fiber fiber tip
4.5 HOLOGRAPHY
Holography involves the recording and reconstruction of optical waves. A hologram is
a 2D transparency that contains a coded record of the amplitude and phase of an optical
wave originating from a 3D object. Consider a monochromatic optical wave whose
complex amplitude in some plane, say the = = 0 plane, is U,(x, y). If, somehow, а thin
optical element (call it a transparency) with complex amplitude transmittance t(x, y)
equal to U,(«, y) were able to be made, it would provide a complete record of the wave.
The wave could then be reconstructed simply by illuminating the transparency with a
uniform plane wave of unit amplitude traveling in the z direction. The transmitted wave
would have a complex amplitude in the = = 0 plane U(x, у) = 1-t(a,y) = U,(a, у).
The original wave would then be reproduced at all points in the z = 0 plane, and
therefore reconstructed everywhere in the space z > 0.

As an example, we know that a uniform plane wave traveling at an angle 9
with respect to the 2 axis in the z—z plane has a complex amplitude U,(z,y) =
exp|—jka sin 0]. A record of this wave would be a transparency with complex
amplitude transmittance t(x,y) = exp|—jka sin 0]. Such a transparency acts as a
prism that bends an incident plane wave exp(—jkz) Бу an angle 6 (see Sec. 2.4B),
thus reproducing the original wave.

The question is how to make a transparency t(, y) from the original wave U,(x, у).
One key impediment is that optical detectors, including the photographic emulsions
used to make transparencies, are responsive to the optical intensity, |U,(a, y)|?, and
are therefore insensitive to the phase arg{U,(x, y)}. Phase information is obviously
important and cannot be disregarded, however. For example, if the phase of the oblique
wave U,(x,y) = exp|—jkx sin 6] were not recorded, neither would the direction of

148 — СНАРТЕВ4 FOURIER OPTICS
travel of the wave. To record the phase of U,(x,y), a code must be found that trans-
forms phase into intensity. The recorded information could then be optically decoded
in order to reconstruct the wave.
The Holographic Code
The holographic code is based on mixing the original wave (hereafter called the object
wave) U, with a known reference wave U,. and recording their interference pattern
in the z = 0 plane. The intensity of the sum of the two waves is photographically
recorded and a transparency of complex amplitude transmittance t, proportional to the
intensity, is made [Fig. 4.5-1(a)]. The transmittance is therefore given by
t x |U, + U,|? = |U,|? + |Uo|? + UZU, + 0,0»,
=I[,+1,+U;U, + 0,0%,
= [,+1,+2,/I,I, cos larg{U,} — arg{U.}] , (4.5-1)
where Г, and I, are, respectively, the intensities of the reference wave and the object
wave at the z = 0 plane.
x | x | Object
а
Reference JA Reference
N/A
NNN
м A\ wa
a’ \ <
[ААА BS
V>
ow Aologram Hologram
Object
(a) Recording (b) Reconstruction
Figure 4.5-1 (a) A hologram is a transparency on which the interference pattern between the
original wave (object wave) and a reference wave is recorded. (b) The original wave is reconstructed
by illuminating the hologram with the reference wave.

The transparency, called a hologram, clearly carries coded information pertinent
to the magnitude and phase of the wave U,. In fact, as an interference pattern the
transmittance t is highly sensitive to the difference between the phases of the two
waves, as was shown in Sec. 2.5 (the temporal analog to holography is heterodyning,
discussed in Sec. 2.6). As indicated above, ordinary photography is responsive only to
the intensity of the incident wave and therefore records no phase information.

To decode the information in the hologram and reconstruct the object wave, the
reference wave U, is again used to illuminate the hologram [Fig. 4.5-1(b)]. The result
is a wave with complex amplitude

U =tU, « 0,1, + 0,1 + 1.0. + 020* (4.5-2)
in the hologram plane z = 0. The third term on the right-hand side is the original wave
multiplied by the intensity Г. of the reference wave. If Г. is uniform (independent of x
and y), this term constitutes the desired reconstructed wave. But it must be separated
from the other three terms. The fourth term is a conjugated version of the original wave
modulated by U2. The first two terms represent the reference wave, modulated by the
sum of the intensities of the two waves.

4.5 HOLOGRAPHY 149
If the reference wave is selected to be a uniform plane wave propagating along
the 2 axis УГ. exp(—jkz), then in the 2 = 0 plane U,(x,y) = УГ. is a constant
independent of x and у. Dividing (4.5-2) Бу U, = VI; gives
О(т, у) x Г. + То(х, у) + V Г. Оь(х, у) + V Г. U5 (2, у). (4.5-3)
Reconstructed Wave
in Plane of Hologram
The significance of the various terms in (4.5-3), and the methods of extracting the
original wave (the third term), are clarified by means of a number of examples.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 4.5-1. Hologram of an Oblique Plane Wave. _ If the object wave is an oblique
plane wave at angle 0 [Fig. 4.5-2(a)], U.(2, у) = УГ exp(—jkz sin 0), then (4.5-3) gives U(x, у) «
1. + Ь + УГ. exp(—jkaz sin 0) + /I,-I, exp(—jkz sin 0). Since the first two terms are constant,
they correspond to a wave propagating in the z direction (the continuance of the reference wave). The
third term corresponds to the original object wave, whereas the fourth term represents the conjugate
wave, a plane wave traveling at an angle —0. The object wave is therefore separable from the other
waves. In fact, this hologram is nothing but a recording of the interference pattern formed from two
oblique plane waves at an angle 0 (Sec. 2.5A). It serves as a sinusoidal diffraction grating that splits
an incident reference wave into three waves at angles 0, 0, and —9 [see Fig. 4.5-2(b) and Sec. 2.4B].
x | x | Object А
Reference A Reference vA,
[7 ПНА ААА
ANZ - gs" [=
ААА \ < LER и <
AA y A iy ИННА
Hologram Hologram
Object Conjugate
(a) Recording (b) Reconstruction
Figure 4.5-2 The hologram of an oblique plane wave is a sinusoidal diffraction grating.
EXAMPLE 4.5-2. Hologram of a Point Source. Here the object wave is a spherical wave
originating at the point го = (0,0, —d), as illustrated in Fig. 4.5-3, so that U,(x, у) « exp(—jk|r —
ro|)/|r — ro|, where г = (a, y,0). The first term of (4.5-3) corresponds to a plane wave traveling
in the z direction, whereas the third is proportional to the amplitude of the original spherical wave
originating at (0,0,—d). The fourth term is proportional to the amplitude of the conjugate wave
0*(т, у) « exp(jk|r — ro|)/|r — го|, which is a converging spherical wave centered at the point
(0,0, 4). The second term is proportional to 1/|r — ro|? and its corresponding wave therefore travels
in the z direction with very small angular spread since its intensity varies slowly in the transverse
plane.
x | x | Object
Reference Reference
7) Ai un
ЩИ AM >
ject ] й
ый val)
Hologram
К, —_—>|
(a) Recording (b) Reconstruction
Figure 4.5-3 Hologram of a spherical wave originating from a point source. The conjugate wave
forms a real image of the point.
ПОНИ

150 — СНАРТЕВ4 FOURIER OPTICS

Off-Axis Holography

One means of separating the four components of the reconstructed wave is to ensure
that they vary at well-separated spatial frequencies, so that they have well-separated
directions. This form of spatial-frequency multiplexing (see Sec. 4.1 A) is assured if the
object and reference waves are offset so that they arrive from well-separated directions.

Let us consider the case when the object wave has a complex amplitude U,(x, y) =
f(x, у) exp(—jka sin 0). This is a wave of complex envelope f(x,y) modulated by a
phase factor equal to that introduced by a prism with deflection angle 6. It is assumed
that f(x, у) varies slowly so that its maximum spatial frequency и, corresponds to ап
angle 9, = sin~' \v, much smaller than 0. The object wave therefore has directions
centered about the angle 9, as illustrated in Fig. 4.5-4. Equation (4.5-3) gives

(т, у) x 1. + |1 (в, у) + М1. f(x,y) exp(—jka sin 0)
+ УГ. } (5, у) exp(+jkza sin 0). (4.5-4)
Object
РА.
x | x |
Reference Reference AY Ambiguity
LN > A Ин —
ЗА \ < Ai Wit 6
LEW A A } Uff
\\ о (TN ;
(© 0 Hologram Hologram NG (© ry Conjugate
Object Чу)
(a) Recording (b) Reconstruction
Figure 4.5-4 Hologram of an off-axis object wave. The object wave is separated from both the
reference and conjugate waves.

The third term is evidently a replica of the object wave, which arrives from a
direction at angle 6. The presence of the phase factor exp(+jkz sin 0) in the fourth
term indicates that it is deflected in the —6 direction. The first term corresponds to
a plane wave traveling in the z direction. The second term, usually known as the
ambiguity term, corresponds to a nonuniform plane wave in directions within a cone
of small angle 20, around the z direction. The offset of the directions of the object
and reference waves results in a natural angular separation of the object and conjugate
waves from each other and from the other two waves if 6 > 36,, thus allowing the
original wave to be recovered unambiguously. An alternative method of reducing the
effect of the ambiguity wave is to make the intensity of the reference wave much greater
than that of the object wave. The ambiguity wave [second term of (4.5-3)] is then much
smaller than the other terms since it involves only object waves; it is therefore relatively
negligible.

Fourier-Transform Holography

The Fourier transform F'(v,,v,) of a function f(a, у) may be computed optically by
use of a lens (see Sec. 4.2). If f(x, у) is the complex amplitude in one focal plane of
the lens, then F'(x/Af, y/Af) is the complex amplitude in the other focal plane, where

4.5 HOLOGRAPHY 151
f is the focal length of the lens and Л is the wavelength. Since the Fourier transform is
usually a complex-valued function, it cannot be recorded directly.

The Fourier transform F'(7/Af,y/Af) may be recorded holographically by regard-
ing it as an object wave, U,(x,y) = f(a/Af,y/Af), mixing it with a reference wave
U;(x,y), and recording the superposition аз a hologram [Fig. 4.5-5(a)]. Reconstruc-
tion is achieved by illumination of the hologram with the reference wave as usual. The
reconstructed wave may be inverse Fourier transformed using a lens so that the original
function f(x, у) is recovered [Fig. 4.5-5(b)].

»
——, ae
a “Tee —
Е Fe SS.
EN
Hologram Hologram
7
(a) Recording (b) Reconstruction
Figure 4.5-5 (a) Hologram of a wave whose complex amplitude represents the Fourier transform
of a function f(x, у). (b) Reconstruction of f(x, у) by use of a Fourier-transform lens.
Holographic Spatial Filters
A spatial filter of transfer function H(v,, vy) may be implemented by use of a 4-f opti-
cal system with a mask of complex amplitude transmittance p(x, у) = H(a/Af,y/Af)
placed in the Fourier plane (see Sec. 4.4B). Since the transfer function H(vz,v,) is
usually complex-valued, the mask transmittance p(x, у) has a phase component and
is difficult to fabricate using conventional printing techniques. If the filter impulse
response function h(x, у) is real-valued, however, a Fourier-transform hologram of
h(a, у) may be created by holographically recording the Fourier transform U,(x, у) =
H(a/Af,y/Af), as depicted in Fig. 4.5-6(a).
g(x,y)
f(xy)
и,
=-----»—
Hologram Hologram iN
A(x,y)
(a) Recording (b) Reconstruction
Figure 4.5-6 The VanderLugt holographic filter. (a) A hologram of the Fourier transform of
h(x, у) is recorded. (b) The Fourier transform of f(x,y) is transmitted through the hologram and
inverse Fourier transformed by a lens. The result is a function g(, у) proportional to the convolution
of f(x,y) and h(x, у). The overall process provides a spatial filter with impulse response function
(x,y).

152 CHAPTER4 FOURIER OPTICS
Using the Fourier transform of the input } (т, у) as а reference, U,.(x,y) = F(a/Af,y/Af),
the hologram constructs the wave

U, (a, yUo(a,y) = F(x/Af,y/Af) Н/У, АЛ. (4.5-5)
The inverse Fourier transform of the reconstructed object wave, obtained with a lens
of focal length f as illustrated in Fig. 4.5-6(6), therefore yields a complex amplitude
g(x, у) with a Fourier transform С'(и,, vy) = H(vz, Vy) F (Ve, Vy). Thus, g(x, у) is the
convolution of f(x,y) with h(x, у). The overall system, known as the VanderLugt
filter, performs the operation of convolution, which is the basis of spatial filtering.

If the conjugate wave U,.(a, y)U*(x,y) = F(a/Af,y/Af)H*(@/Af, y/Af) is, in-
stead, inverse Fourier transformed, the correlation, instead of the convolution, of the
functions f(x,y) and h(x, у) is obtained. The operation of correlation is useful in
image-processing applications, including pattern recognition.

The Holographic Apparatus

An essential condition for the successful fabrication of a hologram is the availability
of a monochromatic light source with minimal phase fluctuations. The presence of
phase fluctuations results in the random shifting of the interference pattern and the
washing out of the hologram. For this reason, a coherent light source (usually a laser)
is a necessary part of the apparatus. The coherence requirements for the interference
of light waves are discussed in Chapter 12.

Figure 4.5-7 illustrates a typical experimental configuration used to record a holo-
gram and reconstruct the optical wave scattered from the surface of a physical object.
Using a beamsplitter, laser light is split into two portions; one is used as the reference
wave, whereas the other is scattered from the object to form the object wave. The
optical path difference between the two waves should be as small as possible to ensure
that the two beams maintain a nonrandom phase difference [the term arg{U,} —
arg{U,} in (4.5-1)].

= ре —
Reference | Reference
Object
Le —
— с”
Hologram р _----
Object Hologram

(a) Recording (b) Reconstruction
Figure 4.5-7 Holographic recording and reconstruction.

Since the interference pattern forming the hologram is composed of fine lines sep-
arated by distances of the order of A/sin@, where 9 is the angular offset between
the reference and object waves, the photographic film must be of high resolution
and the system must not vibrate during the exposure. The larger 9, the smaller the
distances between the hologram lines, and the more stringent these requirements are.
The object wave is reconstructed when the recorded hologram is illuminated with the
reference wave, so that a viewer see the object as if it were actually there, with its
three-dimensional character preserved.

4.5 HOLOGRAPHY 153
Volume Holography
It has been assumed so far that the hologram is a thin planar transparency on which the
interference pattern of the object and reference waves is recorded. We now consider
recording the hologram in a relatively thick medium and show that this offers an
advantage. Consider the simple case when the object and reference waves are plane
waves with wavevectors k, and k,. The recording medium extends between the planes
z = Oand z = A, as illustrated in Fig. 4.5-8. The interference pattern is now a function
of x, y, and z:
2
I(2,y.2) = | УТ» ехр(- Лк, -г) + Мо ехр(-Ль 0)
=I[,+1,+2,/I,I, cos(k, -r —k, г)
=I, +1, +2,/I,I, cos(ky - г), (4.5-6)
where К, = К. — k,. This is a sinusoidal pattern of period A = 2” /|Ко| and with the
surfaces of constant intensity normal to the vector ky.
‘|
=| — ky 7
NN АА д--7
ААА ent Z
д” a
N ba
Figure 4.5-8 Interference pattern when the reference and object waves are plane waves. Since
|k,| = |k,| = 2м/Ш^ and |k,| = 27/A, from the geometry of the vector diagram 27/A =
2(27/A) sin(@/2), so that A = \/2sin(6/2).
For example, if the reference wave points in the z direction and the object wave makes
an angle 9 with the z axis, |k,| = 2k sin(@/2) and the period is
А
A = —— 4.5-7
2 sin(0/2) ( )
as illustrated in Fig. 4.5-8.

If recorded in emulsion, this pattern serves as a thick diffraction grating, a volume
hologram. The vector k, is called the grating vector. When illuminated with the
reference wave as illustrated in Fig. 4.5-9, the parallel planes of the grating reflect
the wave only when the Bragg condition sing = A/2A is satisfied, where ¢ is the
angle between the planes of the grating and the incident reference wave (Exercise 2.5-
3). In our case ф = 6/2, so that sin(@/2) = A/2A. In view of (4.5-7), the Bragg
condition is indeed satisfied, so that the reference wave is indeed reflected. As evident
from the geometry, the reflected wave is an extension of the object wave, so that the
reconstruction process is successful.

Suppose now that the hologram is illuminated with a reference wave of different
wavelength Л’. Evidently, the Bragg condition, sin(@/2) = ’/2A, will not be satisfied
and the wave will not be reflected. It follows that the object wave is reconstructed only

154 — СНАРТЕВ4 FOURIER OPTICS
x
— \\
qu
Пе \ 0

Figure 4.5-9 The reference wave is Bragg reflected from the thick hologram and the object wave
is reconstructed.
if the wavelength of the reconstruction source matches that of the recording source.
If light with a broad spectrum (white light) is used as a reconstruction source, only
the “correct” wavelength would be reflected and the reconstruction process would be
successful.

Although the recording process must be done with monochromatic light, the re-
construction can be achieved with white light. This provides a clear advantage in
many applications of holography. Other geometries for recording a reconstruction of a
volume hologram are illustrated in Fig. 4.5-10.

—— \\ \\ \ oy
Reference = Reference \ \ |
= mn Reference Reference | \
a Ри © \ ААА
(a) Transmission hologram (b) Reflection hologram
Figure 4.5-10 Two geometries for recording and reconstruction of a volume hologram. (a) This
hologram is recorded with the reference and object waves arriving from the same side, and is
reconstructed by use of a reversed reference wave; the reconstructed wave is a conjugate wave
traveling in a direction opposite to the original object wave. (b) A reflection hologram is recorded
with the reference and object waves arriving from opposite sides; the object wave is reconstructed by
reflection from the grating.

Another type of hologram that may be viewed with white light is the rainbow
hologram. This hologram is recorded through a narrow slit so that the reconstructed
image, of course, also appears as if seen through a slit. However, if the wavelength of
reconstruction differs from the recording wavelength, the reconstructed wave will ap-
pear to be coming from a displaced slit since a magnification effect will be introduced.
If white light is used for reconstruction, the reconstructed wave appears as the object
seen through many displaced slits, each with a different wavelength (color). The result
is a rainbow of images seen through parallel slits. Each slit displays the object with
parallax effect in the direction of the slit, but not in the orthogonal direction. Rainbow
holograms enjoy wide commercial use as displays.

READINGLIST 155
Computer-Generated Holography
A computer-generated hologram is a hologram of an object that does not physi-
cally exist. The hologram is generated by computing, and then digitally recording,
the interference pattern of a reference wave with a mathematically defined wave that
represents light scattered from a particular virtual object. The hologram may take the
form of a mask, film, or spatial light modulator; when illuminated by the reference
wave it generates the desired object wave. Computer-generated holography is princi-
pally geared toward 3D visualization, including applications in CAD (computer-aided
design), gaming, and video displays.

An important application is the generation of holographic optical elements
(HOEs). One example is the hologram of a point source, described in Example 4.5-2,
which functions as a lens. A HOE that converts a planar wave into another optical
beam with a mathematically defined complex amplitude, such as a Hermite—Gaussian,
Laguerre—Gaussian, Bessel, or Airy beam (see Secs. 3.4 and 3.5), may be created by
computing and digitally recording the interference pattern of the desired beam with a
planar wave, as described in Example 4.5-3.

EXAMPLE 4.5-3. Holographic Optical Element for Generating a Spiral-Phased Wave.
The task at hand is to create a HOE that converts a reference planar wave into a spiral-phased object
wave with complex amplitude U, = exp(—jl@) at the = = 0 plane. Here ф = arctan(y/s) is the
azimuthal angle [see Fig. 3.4-1(b)] and / = 1, 2,... is the topological charge of the associated optical
vortex, as discussed in Sec. 3.4. Choosing a reference planar wave that propagates in the 1—2 plane,
at an angle 6 with respect to the z axis (see Fig. 2.5-4), gives rise to 0, = exp(—jk, sin 6 x) at the
z = 0 plane. Making use of (4.5-1) thus yields an interference pattern given by

I(x,y) =2+2cos(2rz/A—I1¢), 6 = arctan(y/z), (4.5-8)
where A = Л, / зщ 0.

The resultant holograms take the form of vertical sinusoidal fringes of period A with dislocations
near x = 0, as displayed in Fig. 4.5-11. Illuminating the recorded hologram with the reference wave
will result in the generation of a spiral-phased wave with a helical wavefront and the associated value
of [.

y y y

1=1 1=2 1=3
Figure 4.5-11 Computer-generated holographic optical elements for introducing a spiral phase
into a planar wave, for three values of [.

READING LIST

Fourier Optics and Optical Signal Processing
J. W. Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics, Freeman, 4th ed. 2017.
K. Khare, Fourier Optics and Computational Imaging, Wiley, 2016.

156 CHAPTER 4 FOURIER OPTICS

R. К. Tyson, Principles and Applications of Fourier Optics, IOP Publishing, 2014.

р. Voelz, Computational Fourier Optics: A MATLAB Tutorial, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2011.

O. K. Ersoy, Diffraction, Fourier Optics, and Imaging, Wiley, 2006.

E. G. Steward, Fourier Optics: An Introduction, Halsted Press, 2nd ed. 1987; Dover, reissued 2004.

W. Lauterborn and T. Kurz, Coherent Optics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2nd
ed. 2003.

E. L. O’Neill, Introduction to Statistical Optics, Addison—Wesley, 1963; Dover, reissued 2003.

M. A. Abushagur and H. Caulfield, eds., Selected Papers on Fourier Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 105), 1995.

P. W. Hooijmans, Coherent Optical System Design, Wiley, 1994.

A. VanderLugt, Optical Signal Processing, Wiley, 1992.

ЕТ. Yu and $. Yin, eds., Selected Papers on Coherent Optical Processing, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 52), 1992.

G. Reynolds, J. B. DeVelis, G. B. Parrent, and B. J. Thompson, The New Physical Optics Notebook:
Tutorials in Fourier Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 1989.

G. Harburn, C. A. Taylor, and T. R. Welberry, Atlas of Optical Transforms, Cornell University Press,
1975.

M. Cagnet, M. Francon, and S. Mallick, Atlas of Optical Phenomena, Springer-Verlag, reprinted with
supplement 1971.

М. Cagnet, М. Francon, and J. С. Thrierr, Atlas of Optical Phenomena, Springer-Verlag, 1962.

Diffraction

P. Ya. Ufimtsev, Fundamentals of the Physical Theory of Diffraction, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2014.

M. Nieto-Vesperinas, Scattering and Diffraction in Physical Optics, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2006.

H. M. Nussenzveig, Diffraction Effects in Semiclassical Scattering, Cambridge University Press,
1992, paperback ed. 2006.

A. Sommerfeld, Mathematical Theory of Diffraction, Mathematische Annalen, 1896; Birkhduser,
2004.

О. С. O’Shea, Т. J. Suleski, А. О. Kathman, and О. W. Prather, Diffractive Optics: Design, Fabrica-
tion, and Test, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2003.

J. М. Cowley, Diffraction Physics, Elsevier, 3rd revised ed. 1995.

K. E. Oughstun, ed., Selected Papers on Scalar Wave Diffraction, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 51), 1992.

M. Francon, Diffraction: Coherence in Optics, Pergamon, 1966.

Imaging

G. de Villiers and E. R. Pike, The Limits of Resolution, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2017.

D. F. Buscher, Practical Optical Interferometry: Imaging at Visible and Infrared Wavelengths, Cam-
bridge University Press, 2015.

G. Saxby, The Science of Imaging, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2nd ed. 2011.

B.E. A. Saleh, Introduction to Subsurface Imaging, Cambridge University Press, 2011.

У. М. Mahajan, Optical Imaging and Aberrations, Part II. Wave Diffraction Optics, SPIE Optical
Engineering Press, 2nd ed. 2011.

R. L. Easton, Jr., Fourier Methods in Imaging, Wiley, 2010.

D. J. Brady, Optical Imaging and Spectroscopy, Wiley, 2009.

H. H. Barrett and K. J. Myers, Foundations of Image Science, Wiley, 2004.

S. Jutamulia, ed., Selected Papers on Near-Field Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 172), 2002.

C. S. Williams and O. A. Becklund, Introduction to the Optical Transfer Function, SPIE Optical
Engineering Press, 2002.

G. D. Boreman, Modulation Transfer Function in Optical and Electro-Optical Systems, SPIE Optical
Engineering Press, 2001.

М. Frangon, Optical Image Formation and Processing, Academic Press, 1979.

PROBLEMS 157

Holography

U. Schnars, C. Falldorf, J. Watson, and W. Jiiptner, Digital Holography and Wavefront Sensing:

Principles, Techniques and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2015.
T.-C. Poon and J.-P. Liu, Introduction to Modern Digital Holography: With Matlab, Cambridge
University Press, 2014.

Р-А. Blanche, Field Guide to Holography, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2014.

V. Toal, Introduction to Holography, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2012.

F. Unterseher, J. Hansen, and B. Schlesinger, Holography Handbook: Making Holograms the Easy

Way, Ross, paperback 3rd ed. 2010.
L. Yaroslavsky, Digital Holography and Digital Image Processing: Principles, Methods, Algorithms,
Kluwer, 2004, paperback ed. 2010.
G. Saxby, Practical Holography, Institute of Physics, 3rd ed. 2004.
P. Hariharan, Basics of Holography, Cambridge University Press, 2002.
H. I. Bjelkhagen and H. J. Caulfield, eds., Selected Papers on Fundamental Techniques in Hologra-
phy, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 171), 2001.

Т.Е. Kasper and $. A. Feller, Complete Book of Holograms: How They Work and How to Make Them,
Wiley, 1987; Dover, reissued 2001.

R. S. Sirohi and K. D. Hinsch, eds., Selected Papers on Holographic Interferometry Principles and
Techniques, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 144), 1998.

М. Frangon, Holography, Academic Press, 1974.

D. Gabor, Holography, 1948—1971 (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1971), in S. Lundqvist, ed., Nobel
Lectures in Physics 1971-1980, World Scientific, 1992.

PROBLEMS

4.1-3 Correspondence Between Harmonic Functions and Plane Waves. The complex ampli-
tudes of a monochromatic wave of wavelength А in the z = 0 and z = а planes are f(z, у)
and g(x,y), respectively. Assuming that d = 104), use harmonic analysis to determine
g(x, у) in the following cases:

(a) f(x,y) = Е

(b) г.у) = expl(—jn/A)(w +9)

(©) f(a,y) = cos(wa/2X);

(d) f(x,y) = 08? (лу/2^);

(е) f(x,y) = ><, rect[(x/10A) — 2m], т = 0, +1, £2,..., where rect(x) = Lif |x| < 12
and 0, otherwise.

Describe the physical nature of the wave in each case.

4.1-4 Conical Confinement Angle. In Prob. 4.1-3, if f(x,y) is a circularly symmetric function
with a maximum spatial frequency of 200 lines/mm, determine the angle of the cone within
which the wave directions are confined. Assume that A = 633 nm.

4.1-5 Logarithmic Interconnection Map. A transparency of amplitude transmittance t(x, y) =
exp[—j27¢(z)] is illuminated with a uniform plane wave of wavelength Л = 1 им. The
transmitted light is focused by an adjacent lens of focal length f = 100 cm. What must ф(5)
be so that the ray that hits the transparency at position x is deflected and focused to a position
x’ = In(a) for all > 0? (Note that x and x’ are measured in millimeters.) If the lens
is removed, how should ¢(a) be modified so that the system performs the same function?
This system may be used to perform a logarithmic coordinate transformation, as discussed in
Chapter 24 [see Exercise 24.1-2].

4.2-3 Proof of the Lens Fourier-Transform Property.

(a) Show that the convolution of f(x) and exp(—jax?/Ad) may be obtained via three steps:
multiply f(a) by exp(—jax?/Ad); evaluate the Fourier transform of the product at the
frequency и, = х/Ла; and multiply the result by exp(—jaax?/Ad).

(b) The Fourier transform system in Fig. 4.2-4 is a cascade of three systems — propagation a
distance } in free space, transmission through a lens of focal length f, and propagation a
distance f in free space. Noting that propagation a distance d in free space is equivalent

158 CHAPTER 4 FOURIER OPTICS
to convolution with ехр(—7л2? /Ла) [see (4.1-20)], and using the result in (a), derive
the lens’ Fourier-transform equation (4.2-8). For simplicity ignore the y dependence.

4.2-4 Fourier Transform of the Line Functions. A transparency of amplitude transmittance
t(x, у) is illuminated with a plane wave of wavelength Л = 1 ит and focused with a lens of
focal length f = 100 cm. Sketch the intensity distribution in the plane of the transparency
and in the lens focal plane in the following cases (all distances are measured in mm):

(a) Их, у) = 0(a — y);

(b) t(x,y) = (a +a) + 6(a—a), a=1mm;

(с) t(a,y) = (a+ a) +0( -а), a= 1mm;

where 6(-) is the delta function (see Appendix A, Sec. A.1).

4.2-5 Design of an Optical Fourier-Transform System. Consider a lens used to display the
Fourier transform of a two-dimensional function with spatial frequencies between 20 and
200 lines/mm. If the wavelength of light is А = 488 nm, what should be the focal length of
the lens so that the highest and lowest spatial frequencies are separated by a distance of 9 cm
in the Fourier plane?

*4.2-6 Generation of the Airy Beam by Use of an Optical Fourier-Transform System. As de-
scribed in Sec. 3.5B, the Airy beam has an amplitude A(z,0) = Ai(a/Wo) in the z = 0
plane, where Ai(x) is the Airy function and Wo is a measure of the beam width. Given that
the Fourier transform of the phase function ехр(723 /3) is equal to 27Ai(27 и,), design an
optical Fourier-transform system that generates the Airy beam using a lens of focal length f
and a mask whose amplitude transmittance is ехр(723 /3). Determine an expression for Wo
of the beam generated in terms of f and the wavelength Л.

4.3-4 Fraunhofer Diffraction from a Diffraction Grating. Derive an expression for the Fraun-
hofer diffraction pattern for an aperture made of М = 2L + 1 parallel slits of infinitesimal
widths separated by equal distances a = 10A,

L
р(т,у) = >76 — та).
m=—L
Sketch the pattern as a function of the observation angle 9 = 1/4, where d is the observation
distance.

4.3-5 Fraunhofer Diffraction with an Oblique Incident Wave. The diffraction pattern from an
aperture with aperture function p(x, у) is proportional to |P(2/Ad, y/Ad)|?, where P(v,., vy)
is the Fourier transform of p(x, у) and 4 is the distance between the aperture and observation
planes. What is the diffraction pattern when the direction of the incident wave makes a small
angle 6,, < 1, with the z-axis in the х—2 plane?

*4.3-6 Fresnel Diffraction from Two Pinholes. Show that the Fresnel diffraction pattern from two
pinholes separated by a distance 2a, i.e., p(x, y) = [6(~—a)+4(x+a)]6(y), at an observation
distance d is the periodic pattern, I(x, у) = (2/Ad)? cos? (27ax/Ad).

*4.3-7 Relation Between Fresnel and Fraunhofer Diffraction. Show that the Fresnel diffraction
pattern of the aperture function p(, у) is equal to the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern of the
aperture function p(x, у) exp[—ja(x? + y?)/Ad].

4.4-1 Blurring a Sinusoidal Grating. An object f(a, y) = cos?(272/a) is imaged by a defocused
single-lens imaging system whose impulse response function (т, у) = 1 within a square of
width D, and is 0 elsewhere. Derive an expression for the distribution of the image g(x, 0)
in the x direction. Derive an expression for the contrast of the image in terms of the ratio
D/a. The contrast is defined as (max — min) / (тах - min), where max and min are the
maximum and minimum values of g(,0), respectively.

4.4-2 Image of a Phase Object. An imaging system has an impulse response function h(x, у) =
rect(z) 6(y). If the input wave is

exp (i5) for x > 0
f(a,y) = т
ехр (25) Юга < 0,
determine and sketch the intensity |g(z, y)|? of the output wave g(x,y). Verify that even
though the intensity of the input wave | f(x, y)|? = 1, the intensity of the output wave is not
uniform.

PROBLEMS 159

4.4-3 Optical Spatial Filtering. Consider the spatial filtering system shown in Fig. 4.4-5 with
f = 1000 mm. The system is illuminated with a uniform plane wave of unit amplitude
and wavelength Л = 10-3 mm. The input transparency has amplitude transmittance f(z, у)
and the mask has amplitude transmittance p(x, y). Write an expression relating the complex
amplitude g(x,y) of light in the image plane to f(x,y) and р(т,у). Assuming that all
distances are measured in mm, sketch g(x, 0) in the following cases:

(a) f(w,y) = д(х — 5) and p(x, у) = rect(a);

(b) f(x,y) = rect(x) and p(x, у) = sinc(x).

Determine p(x, у) such that g(x,y) = V2.f (x,y), where V2, = 02/02? + 8? /dy? is the

transverse Laplacian operator.

4.4-4 Optical Correlation. Show how a spatial filter may be used to perform the operation of opti-
cal correlation (see Appendix A) between two images described by the real-valued functions
fi(a,y) and № (т, у). Under what conditions would the complex amplitude transmittances
of the masks and transparencies used be real-valued?

*4.4-5 Impulse Response Function of a Severely Defocused System. Using wave optics, show that
the impulse response function of a severely defocused imaging system (where the defocusing
error € is very large) may be approximated by h(x, у) = p(a/ed2, y/edz), where p(x, у) is
the pupil function. Hint: Use the method of stationary phase described on page 125 (second
proof) to evaluate the integral resulting from the use of (4.4-11) and (4.4-10). Note that this
is the same result as that predicted by the ray theory of light [see (4.4-2)].

4.4-6 Two-Point Resolution.

(a) Consider the single-lens imaging system discussed in Sec. 4.4C. Assuming a square
aperture of width D, unit magnification, and perfect focus, write an expression for the
impulse response function (т, у).

(b) Determine the response of the system to an object consisting of two points separated by
a distance 8, 1.е.,

f(x,y) = 6(x) 6(y) + 5(x — b) d(y).

(с) If Ad2/D = 0.1 mm, sketch the magnitude of the image g(x, 0) as a function of 2 when
the points are separated by a distance b = 0.5, 1, and 2 mm. What is the minimum
separation between the two points such that the image remains discernible as two spots
instead of a single spot, 1.е., has two peaks?

4.4-7 Ring Aperture.

(a) A focused single-lens imaging system, with magnification М = 1 and focal length f =
100 cm has an aperture in the form of a ring

pla v= {5 as ya ту Sb,
? 0, otherwise,
where a = 5 mm and 6 = 6 mm. Determine the transfer function H(v,, v,) of the system
and sketch its cross section Н(и,, 0). Assume that the wavelength \ = 1 ym.

(b) If the image plane is now moved closer to the lens so that its distance from the lens
becomes dy = 25 cm, with the distance between the object plane and the lens d as in
(a), use the ray-optics approximation to determine the impulse response function of the
imaging system h(a, у) and sketch h(x, 0).

4.5-1 Holography with a Spherical Reference Wave. The choice of a uniform plane wave as
a reference wave is not essential to holography; other waves can be used. Assuming that
the reference wave is a spherical wave centered about the point (0, 0, —а), determine the
hologram pattern and examine the reconstructed wave when:

(a) the object wave is a plane wave traveling at an angle 0,;

(b) the object wave is a spherical wave centered at (—2,0, —а1).

Approximate spherical waves by paraboloidal waves.

4.5-2 Optical Correlation via Holography. A transparency with an amplitude transmittance given
by f(x,y) = fila — a,y) + fo(a + а, у) is Fourier transformed by a lens and the intensity
is recorded on a transparency (hologram). The hologram is subsequently illuminated with a
reference wave and the reconstructed wave is Fourier transformed with a lens to generate the
function g(x,y). Derive an expression relating g(x,y) to (т, у) and fo(x, у). Show how
the correlation of f(x,y) and fo(x, у) may be determined with this system.

CHAPTER
ee
5.1 ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF LIGHT 162
5.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN DIELECTRIC MEDIA 166

A. Linear, Nondispersive, Homogeneous, and Isotropic Media
B. Nonlinear, Dispersive, Innomogeneous, or Anisotropic Media
5.3 MONOCHROMATIC ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 172
5.4 ELEMENTARY ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 175
А. Plane, Dipole, and Gaussian Electromagnetic Waves
B. Relation Between Electromagnetic Optics and Scalar Wave Optics
C. Vector Beams
5.5 ABSORPTION AND DISPERSION 181
A. Absorption
B. Dispersion
C. The Resonant Medium
5.6 SCATTERING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 192
A. Born Approximation
B. Rayleigh Scattering
C. Mie Scattering
D. Attenuation in a Medium with Scatterers
5.7 PULSE PROPAGATION IN DISPERSIVE MEDIA 199
James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879) advanced Lord Rayleigh (John William Strutt)
the theory that light is an electromagnetic (1842-1919) contributed extensively to many
wave phenomenon. He formulated a set of fun- areas of optics, including blackbody radiation,
damental equations of enormous importance image formation, and scattering. He was
that bear his name. awarded the Nobel Prize in 1904.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa Е. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
160

It is apparent from the results presented in Chapters 2—4 that wave optics has a far
greater reach than ray optics. Remarkably, both approaches provide similar results for
many simple optical phenomena involving paraxial waves, such as the focusing of light
by a lens and the behavior of light in graded-index media and periodic systems. But it is
also clear that wave optics offers something that ray optics cannot: the ability to explain
phenomena such as interference and diffraction, which involve phase, and therefore lie
hopelessly beyond the reach of a simple construct like ray optics. In spite of its many
successes, however, wave optics, like ray optics, is unable to quantitatively account for
some simple observations in an optics experiment, such as the division of light at a
beamsplitter. The fraction of light reflected (and transmitted) turns out to depend on
the polarization of the incident light, which means that the light must be treated in the
context of a vector, rather than a scalar, theory. That’s where electromagnetic optics
enters the picture. In common with radio waves and X-rays, as shown in Fig. 5.0-1,
light is an electromagnetic phenomenon that is described by a vector wave theory. Elec-
tromagnetic radiation propagates in the form of two mutually coupled vector waves, an
electric-field wave and a magnetic-field wave. From this perspective, the wave-optics
approach set forth in Chapter 2, and developed in Chapters 3 and 4, is merely a scalar
approximation to the more complete electromagnetic theory.
: Е = = = Г =
Frequency = = ©) | aw isa N
ea || g 2
wee = = > _ “rave
S| S|S/8/E|5/5/ Ef = 3] 5] se | om
m Е - E g g Е
(in vacuum) 4 1 | — ! — 1 — —
Figure 5.0-1 The electromagnetic spectrum from low frequencies (long wavelengths) to high
frequencies (short wavelengths). The optical region, shown as shaded, is displayed in greater detail
in Fig. 2.0-1.

Electromagnetic optics thus encompasses wave optics, which in turn reduces to
ray optics in the limit of short wavelengths, as shown in Chapter 2. This hierarchy
is displayed in Fig. 5.0-2.

Electromagnetic Figure 5.0-2 Electromagnetic optics is a vector
Optics theory comprising an electric field and a magnetic
| field that vary in time and space. Wave optics is
Wave Optics an approximation to electromagnetic optics that relies
Ray Optics on the wavefunction, a scalar function of time and
space. Ray optics is the limit of wave optics when the

wavelength is very short.

Optical frequencies occupy a band of the electromagnetic spectrum that extends
from the infrared through the visible to the ultraviolet, as shown in Fig. 5.0-1. The

161

162 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS

range of wavelengths that is generally considered to lie in the optical domain extends
from 10 nm to 300 им (as is shown in greater detail in Fig. 2.0-1). Because these
wavelengths are substantially shorter than those of radiowaves, or even microwaves, the
techniques involved in their generation, transmission, and detection have traditionally
been rather distinct. In recent years, however, the march toward miniaturization has
served to blur these differences: it is now commonplace to encounter wavelength- and
subwavelength-size resonators, antennas, waveguides, lasers, and other structures.
This Chapter

This chapter offers a brief review of those aspects of electromagnetic theory that are of
paramount importance in optics. The fundamental theoretical construct — Maxwell’s
equations — is set forth in Sec. 5.1. The behavior of optical electromagnetic waves
in dielectric media is examined in Sec. 5.2. Together, these sections lay out the fun-
damentals of electromagnetic optics and provide the set of laws that govern the re-
maining sections of the chapter. These rules simplify considerably for the special case
of monochromatic light, as discussed in Sec. 5.3. Elementary electromagnetic waves
(plane waves, dipole waves, and Gaussian beams), introduced in Sec. 5.4, provide
important examples that are often encountered in practice. Section 5.5 is devoted to
a study of the propagation of light in dispersive media, which exhibit wavelength-
dependent absorption and refraction, as do real media. The scattering of electromag-
netic waves, considered in Sec. 5.6, plays an important role in optics and plasmonics, as
discussed in Chapter 8. Finally, in Sec. 5.7, we consider pulse propagation in dispersive
media, which provides a basic underpinning for Chapters 10, 23, and 25.

Chapter 6, which is based on the theory of electromagnetic optics presented in this
chapter, deals explicitly with the polarization of light and the interaction of polarized
light with dielectric and anisotropic media such as liquid crystals. The material set forth
here also forms the basis for the expositions provided in Chapters 7—11, which deal,
respectively, with the optics of layered and periodic media, metals and metamaterials,
guided waves, fibers, and resonators. Chapters 12 and 22, devoted to statistical optics
and nonlinear optics, respectively, are also based on electromagnetic optics.

5.1 ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF LIGHT
An electromagnetic field is described by two related vector fields that are functions of
position and time: the electric field & (г, +) and the magnetic field (г, t). In general,
therefore, six scalar functions of position and time are required to describe light in
free space. Fortunately, these six functions are interrelated since they must satisfy the
celebrated set of coupled partial differential equations known as Maxwell’s equations.
Maxwell’s Equations in Free Space
The electric- and magnetic-field vectors in free space satisfy Maxwell’s equations:
05
Ух H = в — 5.1-1
oD (5.1-1)
OK
Vx € = -№— 5.1-2
Mom (5.1-2)
У. & =0 (5.1-3)
У. К =0, (5.1-4)
Maxwell’s Equations
(Free Space)

5.1 ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF LIGHT 163
where the constants © = (1/367) x 10-9 F/m and pp, = 4 x 10-7 H/m (MKS
units) are, respectively, the electric permittivity and the magnetic permeability of
free space. The vector operators V- and V x represent the divergence and curl, respec-
tively.’

The Wave Equation
A necessary condition for € and I to satisfy Maxwell’s equations is that each of their
components satisfy the wave equation
2
Vu 424 9, (5.1-5)
со Ot Wave Equation
(Free Space)
Here
|
Co = —— x 3 x 10° m/s (5.1-6)
€oMo Speed of Light
(Free Space)
is the speed of light in vacuum, and the scalar function u(r,¢) represents any of the
three components (€,, €,, ©.) of & or the three components (H,, Hy, С.) of KH.

The wave equation may be derived from Maxwell’s equations by applying the curl
operation V x to (5.1-2), making use of the vector identity V x (V x E) = V(V-€) —
VE, and then using (5.1-1) and (5.1-3) to show that each component of € satisfies
the wave equation. A similar procedure is followed for С. Since Maxwell’s equations
and the wave equation are linear, the principle of superposition applies: if two sets of
electric and magnetic fields are solutions to these equations separately, their sum is
also a solution.

The connection between electromagnetic optics and wave optics is now evident. The
wave equation (2.1-2), which is the basis of wave optics, is embedded in the structure
of electromagnetic theory; the speed of light is related to the electromagnetic constants
Ео and мо by (5.1-6); and the scalar wavefunction u(r, t) in Chapter 2 represents any of
the six components of the electric- and magnetic-field vectors. Electromagnetic optics
reduces to wave optics in problems for which the vector nature of the electromagnetic
fields is not of essence. As we shall see in this and the following chapters, the vector
character of light underlies polarization phenomena and governs the amount of light
reflected or transmitted through boundaries between different media, and therefore
determines the characteristics of light propagation in waveguides, layered media, and
optical resonators.

Maxwell’s Equations т a Medium

In a medium devoid of free electric charges and currents, two additional vector fields
are required — the electric flux density (also called the electric displacement)
D(r,t) and the magnetic flux density B(r,t). The four fields, E, К, D, and B, are
related by Maxwell’s equations in a source-free medium:

* In a Cartesian coordinate system У - & = 0ё»/дх + O€y/dy + Е. /0= whereas У x & is a vector with
Cartesian components (0&./ду — 0Ey/0z), (0Ex/Oz — OEz/Ox), and (OEy/Ox — OEx /Oy).

164 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
OD
VxH=—— 5.1-7
5% (5.1-7)
OB
Ух& =-— 5.1-8
at отв
У. =0 (5.1-9)
У. В=0. (5.1-10)
Maxwell’s Equations
(Source-Free Medium)
Conductive media such as metals have free electric charges, requiring the addition of an
associated current density J to the right-hand side of (5.1-7), as discussed in Sec. 8.2A.
Maxwell’s original formulation in 1865 comprised 20 simultaneous equations with 20
variables; these were condensed into their present form by Oliver Heaviside in 1885.
The relationship between the electric flux density D and the electric field € depends
on the electric properties of the medium, which are characterized by the polarization
density P. In a dielectric medium, the polarization density is the macroscopic sum of
the electric dipole moments induced by the electric field. Similarly, the relation be-
tween the magnetic flux density B and the magnetic field HH depends on the magnetic
properties of the medium, embodied in the magnetization density М, which is defined
analogously to the polarization density. The equations relating the flux densities and
the fields are D= c& +P (5.1-11)
З = ие + woM. (5.1-12)
The vector fields P and М are in turn related to the externally applied electric and
magnetic fields & and KH by relationships that depend on the electric and magnetic
character of the medium, respectively, as will be described in Sec. 5.2. Equations
relating P and E, as well as М and HK, are established once the medium is specified.
When these latter equations are substituted into Maxwell’s equations in a source-free
medium, the flux densities disappear.
In free space, P = М = 0, so that D = в & and B = pH whereupon (5.1-7)-
(5.1-10) reduce to the free-space Maxwell’s equations, (5.1-1)-(5.1-4).
Boundary Conditions
In a homogeneous medium, all components of the fields E, HH, D, and B are con-
tinuous functions of position. At the boundary between two dielectric media, in the
absence of free electric charges and currents, the tangential components of the electric
and magnetic fields & and С, and the normal components of the electric and magnetic
flux densities D and B, must be continuous (Fig. 5.1-1).
Dielectric D в Dielectric
ae А pe
Dielectric Perfect conductor
Figure 5.1-1 Boundary conditions at: (a) the interface between two dielectric media; (b) the
interface between a perfect conductor and a dielectric material.
At the boundary between a dielectric medium and a perfectly conductive medium,
the tangential components of the electric-field vector must vanish. Since a perfect

5.1 ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF LIGHT 165
mirror is made of a perfectly conductive material (a metal), the component of the
electric field parallel to the surface of the mirror must be zero. This requires that at
normal incidence the electric fields of the reflected and incident waves must have equal
magnitudes and a phase shift of 7 so that their sum adds up to zero.

These boundary conditions are an integral part of Maxwell’s equations. They are
used to determine the reflectance and transmittance of waves at various boundaries (see
Sec. 6.2), and the propagation of waves in periodic dielectric structures (see Sec. 7.1)
and waveguides (see Sec. 9.2).

Intensity, Power, and Energy
The flow of electromagnetic power is governed by the vector

S=EXxHK, (5.1-13)
which is known as the Poynting vector. The direction of power flow is along the di-
rection of the Poynting vector, i.e., orthogonal to both & and С. The optical intensity
I(r, t) (power flow across а unit area normal to the vector $)! is the magnitude of the
time-averaged Poynting vector (S). The average is taken over times that are long in
comparison with an optical cycle, but short compared to other times of interest. The
wave-optics equivalent is given in (2.1-3).

Using the vector identity V . (& x Hl) = (V x E)- H-(V x KH) - E, together with

Maxwell’s equations (5.1-7)—(5.1-8) and (5.1-11)—(5.1-12), we obtain
д [1 1 OP OM
V8 =—= [567 + „ро | -&- = — pH. 5.1-14
at (5 от № at aE 6.179
The first and second terms in parentheses in (5.1-14) represent the energy densities
(per unit volume) stored in the electric and magnetic fields, respectively. The third
and fourth terms represent the power densities associated with the material’s electric
and magnetic dipoles. Equation (5.1-14), known as the Poynting theorem, therefore
represents conservation of energy: the power flow escaping from the surface of an
incremental volume equals the time rate of change of the energy stored inside the
volume.
Momentum
An electromagnetic wave carries linear momentum, which results in radiation pressure
on objects from which the wave reflects or scatters. In free space, the linear momentum
density (per unit volume) is a vector
1
6&E xX B= 55 (5.1-15)
с Linear Momentum Density
proportional to the Poynting vector $. The average momentum in a cylinder of length
с and unit area is ((8)/c?) - с = (S)/c. This momentum crosses the unit area in a
unit time, so that the average rate (per unit time) of momentum flow across a unit area
oriented perpendicular to the direction of $ is ($5) /с.

An electromagnetic wave may also carry angular momentum and may therefore
exert torque on an object. The average rate of angular momentum transported by
an electromagnetic field is r x (5) /с. For example, the Laguerre-Gaussian beams
introduced in Sec. 3.4 have helical wavefronts; the Poynting vector has an azimuthal
component that leads to an orbital angular momentum.

1 For a discussion of this interpretation, see M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University
Press, 7th expanded and corrected ed. 2002, pp. 7-10.

166 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
5.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN DIELECTRIC MEDIA
The character of the medium is embodied in the relation between the polarization and
magnetization densities, P and М, on the one hand, and the electric and magnetic
fields, & and С, on the other; these are known as the constitutive relation. In most
media, the constitutive relation separates into a pair of constitutive relations, one be-
tween P and &, and another between M and KH. The former describes the dielectric
properties of the medium, whereas the latter describes its magnetic properties. With the
notable exceptions of magnetic materials, optically active materials, and metamaterials,
the principal emphasis in this book is on the dielectric properties. We therefore direct
our attention to the P-E relations for various dielectric media; the J(-H relations for
magnetic media obey similar relations under similar conditions.
It is useful to regard the P-E constitutive relation as arising from a system in which
& is the input and P is the output or response (Fig. 5.2-1). Note that E = E(r,t) and
P = P(r, t) are functions of both position and time.
E(r,t) Pr,t) Figure 5.2-1 In response to an applied electric
Medium field E, the dielectric medium creates а polari-
zation density P.
Definitions
= A dielectric medium is said to be linear if the vector field P(r, t) is linearly
related to the vector field & (г, $). The principle of superposition then applies.
= The medium is said to be nondispersive if its response is instantaneous, 1.e., if
P at time ¢ is determined by & at the same time $ and not by prior values of
©. Nondispersiveness is clearly an idealization since all physical systems, no
matter how rapidly they may respond, do have a response time that is finite.
= The medium is said to be homogeneous if the relation between P and & is
independent of the position r.
= The medium is said to be isotropic if the relation between the vectors P and &
is independent of the direction of the vector &, so that the medium exhibits the
same behavior from all directions. The vectors P and & must then be parallel.
и The medium is said to be spatially nondispersive if the relation between P and
© is local, i.e., if P at each position г is influenced only by € at the same
position r. The medium is assumed to be spatially nondispersive throughout
this chapter (optically active media, considered in Sec. 6.4A, are spatially dis-
persive).
A. Linear, Nondispersive, Homogeneous, and Isotropic Media
Let us first consider the simplest case of linear, nondispersive, homogeneous, and
isotropic dielectric media. The vectors P and € at every position and time are then
parallel and proportional, so that
where the scalar constant х is called the electric susceptibility (Fig. 5.2-2).

5.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN DIELECTRIC MEDIA 167
Figure 5.2-2 A linear, nondispersive, homo-
E P geneous, and isotropic medium is fully character-
x ized by a single constant, the electric susceptibility
Х.
Substituting (5.2-1) in (5.1-11) shows that D and & are also parallel and propor-
tional,
D=cE, (5.2-2)
where the scalar quantity
€=6€(1+x) (5.2-3)
is defined as the electric permittivity of the medium. The relative permittivity с/о =
1+ x is also called the dielectric constant of the medium.
Under similar conditions, the magnetic relation can be written in the form
B= pH, (5.2-4)
where ju is the magnetic permeability of the medium.
With the relations (5.2-2) and (5.2-4), Maxwell’s equations in (5.1-7)—(5.1-10) relate
only the two vector fields E(r,t) and H(r, t), simplifying to
OE
V x H = =— 5.2-5
“at 625)
OK
Vx € =-и— 5.2-6
Mae (5.2-6)
V-E=0 (5.2-7)
V-H=0. (5.2-8)
Maxwell’s Equations
(Linear, Nondispersive, Homogeneous,
Isotropic, Source-Free Medium)
It is apparent that (5.2-5)-(5.2-8) are identical in form to the free-space Maxwell’s
equations in (5.1-1)—(5.1-4) except that е replaces €, and р replaces мо. Each compo-
nent of € and H therefore satisfies the wave equation
10?
Уи ИО, (5.2-9)
с? Ot?
Wave Equation
(in a Medium)
where the speed of light in the medium is denoted c:
Е (5.2-10)
с= —. .2-
ver Speed of Light
(in a Medium)

168 CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
The ratio of the speed of light in free space to that in the medium, c,/c, is defined
as the refractive index n:
с
n=2=,/£F. (5.2-11)
с бо Ho Refractive Index
where (5.1-6) provides
1
Co = —. (5.2-12)
V £oHo
For a nonmagnetic material, js = js. and
€
n=,/£= ЛЕХ, (5.2-13)
бо Refractive Index
(Nonmagnetic Media)
so that the refractive index is the square root of the relative permittivity. These relations
provide another point of connection with scalar wave optics (Sec. 2.1), as discussed
further in Sec. 5.4B.
Finally, the Poynting theorem (5.1-14) based on Maxwell’s equations (5.2-5) and
(5.2-6) takes the form of a continuity equation
ow
V-§8=-—— 5.2-14
57 ( )
where
W = $e €? + Зи? (5.2-15)
is the energy density stored in the medium.
В. Nonlinear, Dispersive, Inhomogeneous, or Anisotropic Media
We now consider nonmagnetic dielectric media for which one or more of the properties
of linearity, nondispersiveness, homogeneity, and isotropy are not satisfied.
Inhomogeneous Media
We first consider an inhomogeneous dielectric (such as a graded-index medium) that
is linear, nondispersive, and isotropic. The simple proportionalities, P = e,yvE& and
Л = с&, remain intact, but the coefficients Хх and е become functions of position:
х = x(r) and е = e(r) (Fig. 5.2-3). The refractive index therefore also becomes
position dependent so that n = n(r).
E(r) Pr) Figure 5.2-3 An inhomogeneous (but linear,
xr) nondispersive, and isotropic) medium is character-
ized by a position dependent susceptibility y(r).

5.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN DIELECTRIC MEDIA —- 169

Beginning with Maxwell’s equations, (5.1-7)-(5.1-10), and noting that « = e(r) is
position dependent, we apply the curl operation V x to both sides of (5.1-8). We then
use (5.1-7) to write

1 025
ух (ухо. (5.2-16)
€ со Ot Wave Equation
(Inhomogeneous Medium)
The magnetic field satisfies a different equation:
1 PH
Vx (2V x H) = 555. (5.2-17)
€ ce Ot Wave Equation
(Inhomogeneous Medium)
Equation (5.2-16) may also be written in the form
5 1 OE
VE+V( - УЕ: & | — toe = = 0. (5.2-18)
Е Ot?
The validity of (5.2-18) can be demonstrated by employing the following procedure.
Use the identity У x (Ух €) = V(V - €) — V’E, valid for a rectilinear coordinate
system. Invoke (5.1-9), which yields У . е& = 0, together with the identity V -«E =
eV - & + УЕ: &, which provides У - & = —(1/e)Ve - &. Finally, substitute in (5.2-16)
to obtain (5.2-18).

For media with gradually varying dielectric properties, 1.е., when с(г) varies suf-
ficiently slowly so that it can be assumed constant within distances of the order of a
wavelength, the second term on the left-hand side of (5.2-18) is negligible in compari-
son with the first, so that

ve - РЕ о (5.2-19)
с?(г) ОР”? |
where с(г) = 1/\/йоЕ = со/п(г) is spatially varying and n(r) = \/е(г)/во is the
refractive index at position r. This relation was invoked without proof in Sec. 2.1, but
it is clearly an approximate consequence of Maxwell’s equations.

For a homogeneous dielectric medium of refractive index n perturbed by a slowly

varying spatially dependent change An, it is often useful to write (5.2-19) in the form
1 028 OP AP
2 ~ _ —

Vee — 29е ~ —5, $ = Ho 52 5 AP = 260% An С, (5.2-20)
where с = со/т is the speed of light in the homogenous medium. Thus, € satisfies the
wave equation with a radiation source $ created by a perturbation of the polarization
density AP, which in turn is proportional to An and € itself. These equations may be
verified by expanding the term 1/c?(r) in (5.2-19) as (n+An)?/c? = (n?+2nAn)/c?
and bringing the perturbation term to the right-hand side of the equation. The term AP
is the perturbation in P, as can be shown by noting that P = egv€ = eg(e/e, — 1)& =
€o(n? — 1)6, so that AP = €,A(n? — 1) = 26 пДп 6.

170 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
Anisotropic Media
The relation between the vectors P and & in an anisotropic dielectric medium depends
on the direction of the vector €; the requirement that the two vectors remain parallel
is not maintained. If the medium is linear, nondispersive, and homogeneous, each
component of P is a linear combination of the three components of E:

P; = У` бо Xij Ej, (5.2-21)

j

where the indices 7, 7 = 1, 2, 3 denote the x, у, and z components, respectively.

The dielectric properties of the medium are then described by a 3 x 3 array of
constants {;; }, which are elements of what is called the electric susceptibility tensor
х (Fig. 5.2-4). A similar relation between D and & applies:

р; = У. ей бр (5.2-22)
j
where {e;;} are the elements of the electric permittivity tensor е.
foal P|
Figure 5.2-4 An anisotropic (but linear, homo-
SS geneous, and nondispersive) medium is charac-

22 > oN Pa terized by nine constants, the components of the

< ` electric susceptibility tensor y;;. Each component

&3 р Py of P is a weighted superposition of the three
——_* components of &.

The optical properties of anisotropic media are examined in Chapter 6. The relation
between B(t) and ($) for anisotropic magnetic media takes а form similar to that of
(5.2-22), under similar assumptions.

Dispersive Media

The relation between the vectors P and & in a dispersive dielectric medium is dynamic
rather than instantaneous. The vector & ($) may be thought of as an input that induces
the bound electrons in the atoms of the medium to oscillate, which then collectively
give rise to the polarization-density vector P(t) as the output. The presence of a time
delay between the output and the input indicates that the system possesses memory.
Only when this time is short in comparison with other times of interest can the response
be regarded as instantaneous, in which case the medium is approximately nondisper-
sive.

For dispersive media that are linear, homogeneous, and isotropic, the dynamic rela-
tion between P(t) and E(t) may be described by a linear differential equation such as
that associated with a driven harmonic oscillator: a; d?P /dt? + az dP/dt + a3 P = &,
where а1, а2, and аз are constants. A simple analysis along these lines (see Sec. 5.5C)
provides a physical rationale for the presence of dispersion (and absorption).

More generally, the linear-systems approach provided in Appendix B may be used
to investigate an arbitrary linear system, which is characterized by its response to an
impulse (impulse response function). An electric-field impulse of magnitude 6(t) ap-
plied at time t = 0 induces a time-dispersed polarization density of magnitude €,x(t),
where x(t) is a scalar function of time with finite duration that begins at t = 0. Since
the medium is linear, an arbitrary electric field & (+) then induces a polarization density

5.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN DIELECTRIC MEDIA 171
Figure 5.2-5 In a dispersive (but linear, homo-
geneous, and isotropic) medium the relation between

EO) x(t) PO , P(t) and E(t) is governed by a dynamic linear system

described by an impulse response function €,x(t) that
corresponds to a frequency dependent susceptibility
x(v).
that is a superposition of the effects of E(t’) for all t’ < t, so that the polarization
density can be expressed as a convolution, as defined in Appendix A:
CO
P(t) = «| x(t — t') E(t’) dt’. (5.2-23)
—©
This dielectric medium is completely described by its impulse response function
€ox(t).

Alternatively, a dynamic linear system may be described by its transfer function,
which governs the response to harmonic inputs. The transfer function is the Fourier
transform of the impulse response function (see Appendix B). In the example at hand,
the transfer function at frequency и is еох(и), where x(v) is the Fourier transform
of x(t) so that it is a frequency-dependent susceptibility (Fig. 5.2-5). This concept is
discussed further in Secs. 5.3 and 5.5.

For magnetic media under similar assumptions, the relation between M(t) and I(t)
is analogous to (5.2-23).

Nonlinear Media

A nonlinear dielectric medium is defined as one in which the relation between P and &
is nonlinear, in which case the wave equation as written in (5.2-9) is not applicable.
Rather, Maxwell’s equations can be used to derive a nonlinear wave equation that
electromagnetic waves obey in a such a medium.

We first derive a general wave equation valid for homogeneous and isotropic non-
magnetic media. Operating on Maxwell’s equation (5.1-8) with the curl operator V x,
and using the relation B = и from (5.2-4) together with (5.1-7), we obtain V x (V x
&) = —1,0°D /ОР. Making use of the vector identity V x (V x E) = V(V-E)-V7E
and the relation D = €,E + P from (5.1-11) then yields

OE OP
20 _
V(V . 5) —-WE= ~ foblo Bae — Moa (5.2-24)

For homogeneous and isotropic media D = е&; thus У -D = 0 from (5.1-9) is
equivalent to У - & = 0. Substituting this, along with €,41, = 1/c? from (5.1-6), into
(5.2-24) therefore provides

1 025 OP
VE — э5в = Hoppa: (5.2-25)
со Ot t Wave Equation
(Homogeneous and Isotropic Medium)
Equation (5.2-25) is applicable for all homogeneous and isotropic dielectric media:
nonlinear or linear, nondispersive or dispersive.

Now, if the medium is nonlinear, nondispersive, and nonmagnetic, the polarization
density P can be written as a memoryless nonlinear function of E, say P = $(&),
valid at every position and time. (The simplest example of such a function is P =

172 CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
a, & +a &2, where a; and ag are constants.) Under these conditions (5.2-25) becomes
a nonlinear partial differential equation for the electric-field vector E(r, t):
1 0? 924(&)
УЕ = р. 5.2-26
eae № др (2-26)
The principle of superposition is no longer applicable by virtue of the nonlinear nature
of this wave equation. Nonlinear magnetic materials may be similarly described.
Most dielectric media are approximately linear unless the optical intensity is sub-
stantial, as in the case of focused laser beams. Nonlinear optics is discussed in Chap-
ter 22.
5.3 MONOCHROMATIC ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
For the special case of monochromatic electromagnetic waves in an optical medium,
all components of the electric and magnetic fields are harmonic functions of time with
the same frequency и and corresponding angular frequency w = 27v. Adopting the
complex representation used in Sec. 2.2A, these six real field components may be
expressed as
E(r,t) = Re{E(r) exp(jut)}

Hr, t) = Re{H(r) exp(jwt)}, (5.3-1)
where E(r) and H(r) represent electric- and magnetic-field complex-amplitude vec-
tors, respectively. Analogous complex-amplitude vectors P, D, M, and B are similarly
associated with the real vectors P, D, M, and B, respectively.

Maxwell’s Equations in a Medium
Inserting (5.3-1) into Maxwell’s equations (5.1-7)—(5.1-10), and using the relation
(0/dt) е?** = jw ei” for monochromatic waves of angular frequency w, yields a set
of equations obeyed by the field complex-amplitude vectors:
Vx H=jwD (5.3-2)
V x E=—-jwB (5.3-3)
V-D=0 (5.3-4)
У.В=0. (5.3-5)
Maxwell’s Equations
(Source-Free Medium;
Monochromatic Fields)
Similarly, (5.1-11) and (5.1-12) give rise to
Р=веЕ+Р (5.3-6)
В=рН-иМ. (5.3-7)
Intensity and Power
As indicated in Sec. 5.1, the flow of electromagnetic power is governed by the time
average of the Poynting vector $ = & x С. Casting this expression in terms of complex

5.3 MONOCHROMATIC ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 173
amplitudes yields
$ = Ве {Ее} х Ве {Не} = р (Ее + Е*е J+") х р (Hei? + Н*е 7)
= т (Е x Н* + Е* x H+ ce?" Ex H+ e 2! B* x H*). (5.3-8)
The terms containing the factors e/*“* and e~/“" oscillate at optical frequencies and
are therefore washed out by the averaging process, which is slow in comparison with
an optical cycle. Thus,
($) = 1(Е x H* + E* x H) = $(S+ 5*) = Re{S}, (5.3-9)
where the vector
$ = 3E x H* (5.3-10)
Complex Poynting Vector
may be regarded as a complex Poynting vector. The optical intensity is the magnitude
of the vector Re{S}.
Linear, Nondispersive, Homogeneous, and Isotropic Media
For monochromatic waves, the relations provided in (5.2-2) and (5.2-4) become the
material equations
D=cE and B= uH, (5.3-11)
so that Maxwell’s equations, (5.3-2)—(5.3-5), depend solely on the interrelated complex-
amplitude vectors E and H:
V x H= jweE (5.3-12)
УхЕ =—jwyH (5.3-13)
7. Е =0 (5.3-14)
У.Н = 0. (5.3-15)
Maxwell’s Equations
(Linear, Nondispersive, Homogeneous,
Isotropic, Source-Free Medium;
Monochromatic Light)
Substituting the electric and magnetic fields & and H given in (5.3-1) into the wave
equation (5.2-9) yields the Helmholtz equation
V7U + k?U = 0, К = по = w/e pu (5.3-16)
Helmholtz Equation
where the scalar function U = U(r) represents the complex amplitude of any of the
three components (Р,, E,, Е.) of Е or three components (H,, H,, H,) of H; and
where n = \/(€/€0)(4/Mo), Ко = W/Co, and с = c,/n. In the context of wave optics,
the Helmholtz equation in (2.2-7) was written in terms of the complex amplitude U(r)
of the real wavefunction u(r, t).

174 CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
Inhomogeneous Media
In an inhomogeneous nonmagnetic medium, Maxwell’s equations (5.3-12)—(5.3-15)
remain applicable, but the electric permittivity of the medium becomes position de-
pendent, е = e(r). For locally homogeneous media in which е(г) varies slowly with
respect to the wavelength, the Helmholtz equation (5.3-16) remains approximately
valid, subject to the substitutions К = n(r)k, and n(r) = /e(r)/€o.
Dispersive Media
In a dispersive dielectric medium, P(t) and E(t) are connected by the dynamic relation
provided in (5.2-23). To determine the corresponding relation between the complex-
amplitude vectors P and E, we substitute (5.3-1) into (5.2-23), which gives rise to
Р = ох(и)Е (5.3-17)
where
lee)
x(v) = ] x(t) exp(—j2mvt) dt (5.3-18)
—©
is the Fourier transform of x(t).

Equation (5.3-17) can also be directly inferred from (5.2-23) by invoking the con-
volution theorem: convolution in the time domain corresponds to multiplication in the
frequency domain (see Secs. А.1 and В.1 of Appendices A and В, respectively), and
recognizing E and P as the components of € and P of frequency v. The function
€oX(v) may therefore be regarded as the transfer function of the linear system that
relates P(t) to E(t).

The relation between D and & is similar,

D=ec(v)E (5.3-19)
where
e(v) = € [1+ x(v)]. (5.3-20)

Therefore, in dispersive media the susceptibility х and the permittivity с are
frequency-dependent and, in general, complex-valued quantities. The Helmholtz
equation (5.3-16) is thus readily adapted for use in dispersive nonmagnetic media
by taking

К = wv/e(v) по. (5.3-21)
When x(v) and e(v) are approximately constant within the frequency band of interest,
the medium may be treated as approximately nondispersive. The implications of the
complex-valued nature of х and А in dispersive media are discussed further in Sec. 5.5.

5.4 ELEMENTARY ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 175
5.4 ELEMENTARY ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
A. Plane, Dipole, and Gaussian Electromagnetic Waves
We now examine three elementary solutions to Maxwell’s equations that are of sub-
stantial importance in optics: plane waves and spherical (dipole) waves, which were
discussed in Sec. 2.2B in the context of wave optics, and the Gaussian beam, which
was studied in Chapter 3 using the wave-optics formalism. The medium is assumed to
be linear, homogeneous, nondispersive, and isotropic, and the waves are assumed to be
monochromatic.
The Transverse Electromagnetic (TEM) Plane Wave
Consider a monochromatic electromagnetic wave whose magnetic- and electric-field
complex-amplitude vectors are plane waves with wavevector k (see Sec. 2.2B) so that
H(r) = Ho exp(—jk - r) (5.4-1)
E(r) = Eo exp(—jk -r), (5.4-2)
where the complex envelopes Ну and Ep are constant vectors. All components of
H(r) and E(r) satisfy the Helmholtz equation provided that the magnitude of k is
k = nko, where n is the refractive index of the medium.

We now examine the conditions that must be obeyed by Ну and Ep in order that
Maxwell’s equations be satisfied. Substituting (5.4-1) and (5.4-2) into Maxwell’s equa-
tions (5.3-12) and (5.3-13), respectively, leads to

k x Но = —weEo (5.4-3)

k x Eo = wpHo. (5.4-4)
The other two Maxwell’s equations, (5.3-14) and (5.3-15), are satisfied identically
since the divergence of a uniform plane wave is zero.

It follows from (5.4-3) that E must be perpendicular to both k and H and from
(5.4-4) that H must be perpendicular to both К and Е. Thus, Е, H, and К are mutually
orthogonal, as illustrated in Fig. 5.4-1. Since Е and Н lie in a plane normal to the
direction of propagation k, the wave is called a transverse electromagnetic (TEM)
wave.

ABD ИХ 2’ р 77’
27 2 ZO x Zn - \ y <
ULE KE YY
Wavefront
Figure 5.4-1 The TEM plane wave. The vectors E, H, and k are mutually orthogonal. The
wavefronts (surfaces of constant phase) are normal to the wavevector k.

In accordance with (5.4-3), the magnitudes Но and Eg are related by Hyp =
(we/k) Eo. Similarly, (5.4-4) yields Но = (k/wj)Eo. For these two equations to
be consistent, we must have we/k = k/wp, ork = м \/Ей = w/e = nw/cy = nko.

176 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
This is, in fact, Фе same condition required in order that the wave satisfy the Helmholtz
equation.
The ratio between the amplitudes of the electric and magnetic fields is Ро/Но =
wu/k = си = \/u/e. This quantity is known as the impedance of the medium,
Е
n=—= lt. (5.4-5)
Но € Impedance
For nonmagnetic media 4 = мо, whereupon 7 = \/ро/е may be defined in terms of
the impedance of free space 7, via
nae, (5.4-6)
п Impedance
(Nonmagnetic Media)
where
No = [ES = 1200 = 3779. (5.4-7)
бо
The complex Poynting vector 8 = ТЕ x Н* [see (5.3-10)] is parallel to the wave-
vector k, so that the power flows along a direction normal to the wavefronts. Its
magnitude is 5 Ey Не = |Eo|*/2n, and the intensity J is therefore given by
Е 2
p= Pol (5.4-8)
27 Intensity
The intensity of a TEM wave is thus seen to be proportional to the absolute square of
the complex envelope of the electric field. As an example, an intensity of 10 W/cm? in
free space corresponds to an electric field of = 87 V/cm. Note the similarity between
(5.4-8) and the relation Г = |U|?, which was defined for scalar waves in Sec. 2.2A.
Equation (5.2-15) provides that the time-averaged energy density W = (W) of the
plane wave is
W = 1 Во, (5.4-9)
since the electric and magnetic contributions are equal, 1.е., $€|Eo|?/2 = 514|Ho|?/2.
The intensity in (5.4-8) and the time-averaged energy density in (5.4-9) are therefore
related by
I=cW, (5.4-10)
indicating that the time-averaged power density flow J results from the transport of the
time-averaged energy density at the velocity of light c. This is readily visualized by
considering a cylinder of area A and length c whose axis lies parallel to the direction
of propagation. The energy stored in the cylinder, cAW, is transported across the area
in one second, confirming that the intensity (power per unit area) is J = cW.
The linear momentum density (per unit volume) transported by a plane wave is
(1/c?)8 = (1/c?)ITk = (W/c) К.

5.4 ELEMENTARY ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 177
The Dipole Wave
An oscillating electric dipole radiates a wave with features that resemble the scalar
spherical wave discussed in Sec. 2.2B. The radiation frequency is determined by the
frequency at which the dipole oscillates. This electromagnetic wave is readily con-
structed from an auxiliary vector field А(г), known as the vector potential, which is
often used to facilitate the solution of Maxwell’s equations in electromagnetics. For
the case at hand we set
A(r) = ao U(r) x, (5.4-11)
where ад is a constant and X is a unit vector in the direction of the dipole (the x
direction). The quantity U(r) represents a scalar spherical wave with the origin at
r=0:
U(r) = —— exp(—jkr) (5.4-12)
г) = — — . 4-
Tap Р(- т
Because U(r) satisfies the Helmholtz equation, as was established in Sec. 2.2B, A(r)
will also satisfy the Helmholtz equation У? А + k?A = 0.
We now define the magnetic field in terms of the curl of this vector
1
Н=-УхА, (5.4-13)
Lb
and determine the corresponding electric field from Maxwell’s equation (5.3-12):
1
Е = —V x H. (5.4-14)
JUE
The form of (5.4-13) and (5.4-14) ensures that V- Е = 0 and V-H = 0, аз
required by (5.3-14) and (5.3-15), since the divergence of the curl of any vector field
vanishes. Because A(r) satisfies the Helmholtz equation, it can readily be shown
that the remaining Maxwell’s equation, У x Е = —jwyH, is also satisfied. It is
therefore clear that (5.4-11)—(5.4-14) define a valid electromagnetic wave that satisfies
Maxwell’s equations.

Explicit expressions for E and H are obtained by carrying out the curl operations
prescribed in (5.4-13) and (5.4-14). This is conveniently accomplished by making use
of the spherical coordinate system (r,0,@) defined in Fig. 5.4-2(a), with unit vectors
(r, 0, ф). The exact results for Е and H turn out to be

E(r) = 2e9 cos 0 + ! U(r)r+e ino [1+ —— + Е U(r) 0

г) = cos 8 | —— + —— r)r sin + г

° jkr (Лт) o® jkr (т) ,

(5.4-15)
1 д
Н( г) = hosind } + ra U(r) o, (5.4-16)
jkr
where ho = (jk/,1) Ao and ео = 7 Hp. It can be shown that an electric dipole moment
р pointing in the x direction radiates the wave described in (5.4-15) and (5.4-16) with
ао = jpuwp, so that hy = (—w?/c)p and ео = —pwp.

For points at distances from the origin that are much greater than a wavelength

(kr = 2rr/X > 1), the complex-amplitude vectors in (5.4-15) and (5.4-16) may be

178 — CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
approximated by

E(r) = eo sind U(r) 0, (5.4-17)

H(r) © ho sind U(r) Ф. (5.4-18)
The wavefronts are then spherical (as for the scalar spherical wave) and, as illustrated
in Fig. 5.4-2(b), the electric and magnetic fields are orthogonal to one another and to the
radial direction г, with the electric field pointing in the polar direction and the magnetic
field pointing in the azimuthal direction. Since the field strength is proportional to sin 6,
the radiation pattern is toroidal with a null in the direction of the dipole, as shown in
5.4-2(c). In the paraxial approximation, at points near the z axis and far from the origin,
such that 0 = 7/2 and ¢ = 7/2, the wavefront normals are nearly parallel to the z axis
(corresponding to paraxial rays), and sin@ = 1.

xX x
ae Wavefront
и f “A x
/ ф м
Г
\ a \
' 8 \ Е —
1 fg \
у H y
E E
(a) (b) (с)

Figure 5.4-2 (а) Spherical coordinate system. (b) Electric- and magnetic-field vectors and
wavefronts of the electromagnetic field, at distances r >> Л/2т, radiated by an oscillating electric
dipole. (c) The radiation pattern (field magnitude versus polar angle @) is toroidal.

In a Cartesian coordinate system, 0 = —sin@ & + cos cos фу +cos@singdZ =
—х + (a/z)(y/z) У + (1/2) 8 = —K + (1/2) #, so that

д, фз
E(r) © ep (- +2 2) U(r), (5.4-19)
z
where U(r) is the paraxial approximation of the spherical wave, i.e., the paraboloidal
wave discussed in Sec. 2.2B. For sufficiently large values of 2, the term (x/z) in (5.4-
19) may also be neglected, whereupon
Е(г) = —e9 U(r) xX, (5.4-20)
H(r) hoU(r)y. (5.4-21)
In this approximation U(r) approaches (1/47z) e~J**, so that а TEM plane wave
ultimately emerges, as portrayed in Fig. 2.2-4.

An electromagnetic wave that is dual to the electric-dipole wave discussed above
is radiated by a magnetic dipole with the magnetic dipole moment m pointing in
the x direction. In the far field (kr >> 1), it has an electric field pointing in the
azimuthal direction and an orthogonal magnetic field pointing in the polar direction,
with complex-amplitude vectors given by

5.4 ELEMENTARY ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 179
[| iy’ PY H(r) © ho sin U(r) 0, (5.4-22)
\\; “yy ] * E(r) = ep sind U(r) ф, (5.4-23)
where ho = (w?/c?)m and ес = u(w?/c)m. At radio frequencies, this type of wave
is radiated by electric current flowing in a loop antenna placed in a plane orthogonal to
the x axis. At optical frequencies, tiny metal loops serve as optical antennas (Sec. 8.2D)
and as important components in metamaterials (Sec. 8.3A).
The Gaussian Beam
It was demonstrated in Sec. 3.1 that a scalar Gaussian beam is readily obtained from
a paraboloidal wave (the paraxial approximation to a spherical wave) by replacing the
coordinate z by z + 720, where 20 is a real constant.

The same transformation applied to the corresponding electromagnetic wave leads
to the electromagnetic vector Gaussian beam. Replacing z in (5.4-19) by z + jz
yields

a GH

E(r) = — ———2z]|U 5.4-24

а (8+ 2) v0, (54-24)

where 0 (г) now represents the scalar complex amplitude of a Gaussian beam provided

in (3.1-7). The wavefronts of the Gaussian beam are illustrated in Fig. 5.4-3(a) (these

are also shown in Fig. 3.1-7), while the E-field lines determined from (5.4-24) are

displayed in Fig. 5.4-3(b). In this case, the direction of the Е field is not spatially
uniform.

|

(а)

—250 \" 0 50 250 <
if . \
CELA

Figure 5.4-3 (a) Wavefronts of the scalar Gaussian beam U(r) in the 2—2 plane. (b) Electric-field
lines of the electromagnetic Gaussian beam in the 1—2 plane. (Adapted from Н. A. Haus, Waves and
Fields in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall, 1984, Fig. 5.3a.)

180 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS

В. Relation Between Electromagnetic Optics and Scalar Wave Optics
The paraxial scalar wave, defined in Sec. 2.2C, has wavefront normals that form small
angles with respect to the axial coordinate z. The wavefronts behave locally as plane
waves while the complex envelope and direction of propagation vary slowly with z.

This notion is also applicable to electromagnetic waves in linear isotropic media. A
paraxial electromagnetic wave is locally approximated by a TEM plane wave. At each
point, the vectors Е and H lie т a plane that is tangential to the wavefront surfaces and
normal to the wavevector k (Fig. 5.4-4). The optical power flows along the direction
E x H, which is parallel to k and approximately parallel to the coordinate z.

—* \ \
y \ \ \ Figure 5.4-4 The paraxial electromagnetic
E р i | — wave. The vectors Е and Н reverse directions after
\ Pa i 4 р propagation a distance of a half wavelength.

|

pe) _

A paraxial scalar wave of intensity Г = |U|? [see (2.2-10)] may be associated with
a paraxial electromagnetic wave of the same intensity Г = |E|?/2n [see (5.4-8)] by
setting the complex amplitude to U = E/,/2n and matching the wavefronts. Аз
attested to by the extensive development provided in Chapters 2—4, the scalar-wave
description of light provides a very good approximation for solving a great many
problems involving the interference, diffraction, propagation, and imaging of paraxial
waves. The Gaussian beam with small divergence angle, considered in Chapter 3,
provides a case in point. Most features of these beams, such as their intensity, focusing
by a lens, reflection from a mirror, and interference, are addressed satisfactorily within
the context of scalar wave optics. Of course, when polarization comes into play, wave
optics is mute and we must appeal to electromagnetic optics.

It is of interest to note that U (as defined above) and Е do not satisfy the same
boundary conditions. For an electric field tangential to the boundary between two
dielectric media, for example, FE is continuous (Fig. 5.1-1), but U = В/\/ 27 is dis-
continuous since 7 changes value at the boundary. Thus, problems involving reflection
and refraction at boundaries cannot be addressed completely within the scalar wave
theory, although the matching of phase that leads to the law of reflection and Snell’s
law is adequately carried out within its confines (Sec. 2.4). Indeed, calculations of
reflectance and transmittance at a boundary depend on the polarization state of the
light and therefore require electromagnetic optics (see Sec. 6.2). Similarly, problems
involving the transmission of light through dielectric waveguides require an analysis
based on electromagnetic theory, as discussed in Chapters 9 and 10.

C. Vector Beams
Maxwell’s equations in the paraxial approximation admit other cylindrically symmetric
beam solutions for which the direction of the electric-field vector is spatially nonuni-
form. One example is a beam in which the electric field is aligned in an azimuthal
orientation with respect to the beam axis, as illustrated in Fig. 5.4-5(a), 1.е.,

E(r) = U(p, =) exp(—jkz). (5.4-25)

5.5 ABSORPTION AND DISPERSION 181
The scalar function U(p, z) turns out to be the Bessel—Gauss solution to the Helmholtz
equation, as discussed in Sec. 3.5A. This beam vanishes on-axis (р = 0) and has a
toroidal transverse spatial distribution. The beam diverges in the axial direction and
the spot size increases, much like the Gaussian beam.

Yet another cylindrically-symmetric beam has an azimuthally oriented magnetic-
field vector, so that the electric-field vector is radial, as illustrated schematically in
Fig. 5.4-5(b). It also has a spatial distribution with an on-axis null. The distribution
of the vector field of this beam bears some resemblance to the electromagnetic field
radiated by a dipole oriented along the beam axis (see Fig. 5.4-2).

It has been shown that a vector beam with radial electric-field vector may be focused
by a lens of large numerical aperture to a spot of significantly smaller size than is pos-
sible with a conventional scalar Gaussian beam. Clearly, applications for such beams
find a place in high-resolution microscopy. There are, it turns out, many variations on
the theme of optical vector beams and their uses.

У } y }
——~ м А
fy ЧФ во ae
зы, АНХ
у y N wy
h мм
у у \ — в 23а >
a a pie ae
Wn yy’
(a) (b)
Figure 5.4-5 Vector beams with cylindrical symmetry. (a) Electric-field vectors oriented in the
azimuthal direction. (5) Electric-field vectors oriented in the radial direction. The shading indicates
the spatial distribution of the optical intensity in the transverse plane.
5.5 ABSORPTION AND DISPERSION
In this section, we consider absorption and dispersion in nonmagnetic media.
A. Absorption
The dielectric media considered thus far have been assumed to be fully transparent, 1.е.,
not to absorb light. Glass is such a material in the visible region of the optical spectrum
but it is, in fact, absorptive in the ultraviolet and infrared regions. Transmissive optical
components in those bands are fabricated from other materials: examples are quartz
and magnesium fluoride in the ultraviolet; and germanium and barium fluoride in the
infrared. Figure 5.5-1 illustrates the spectral windows within which some commonly
encountered optical materials are transparent (see Sec. 14.1D for further discussion).

In this section, we adopt a phenomenological approach to the absorption of light in

linear media. Consider a complex electric susceptibility
/ -
X=X FIX; (5.5-1)

182 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
О О ПО О О О О ООО ООО
й
о аа о р
5
——— ©
ТГ] |
0.1 02 03 04 0.5 0.7 1 2 3 4 5 #7 10 20
Wavelength (um)
Figure 5.5-1 The white regions indicate the spectral bands within which the specified optical
materials transmit light. Selected fluorides, glasses, and semiconductors are displayed.
corresponding to a complex electric permittivity « = €,(1 + Х) and a complex relative
permittivity «/¢, = (1+). For monochromatic light, the Helmholtz equation (5.3-16)
for the complex amplitude U(r) remains valid, V?U + k?U = 0, but the wavenumber
k itself becomes complex-valued:
К = шуЕро = ko JL +X = ko V1 +x + IX", (5.5-2)
where Ко = w/c, is the wavenumber in free space.
Writing А in terms of real and imaginary parts, К = 8 — j $a, allows 6 and a to be
related to the susceptibility components y’ and Хх”:
К=В- Да =№УТЕХ + jx”. (5.5-3)
As а result of the imaginary part of К, a plane wave with complex amplitude U =
Aexp(—jkz) traveling through such a medium in the z-direction undergoes a change
in magnitude (as well as the usual change in phase). Substituting К = 6 — 7 та into
the exponent of this plane wave yields U = Aexp(—4az) exp(—j8z). For a > 0,
which corresponds to absorption in the medium, the envelope A of the original plane
wave is attenuated by the factor exp(— $az) so that the intensity, which is proportional
to |U|?, is attenuated by |exp(—4az)|? = exp(—az). The coefficient a is therefore
recognized as the absorption coefficient (also called the attenuation coefficient) of
the medium. This simple exponential decay formula for the intensity provides the
rationale for writing the imaginary part of k as —та. It will be seen in Sec. 15.1А
that certain media, such as those used in lasers, can exhibit а < 0, in which case
у = —а is called the gain coefficient and the medium amplifies rather than attenuates
light.
Since the parameter ( is the rate at which the phase changes with z, it represents
the propagation constant of the wave. The medium therefore has an effective refractive

5.5 ABSORPTION AND DISPERSION 183
index n defined by
B=nko, (5.5-4)
and the wave travels with a phase velocity с = c,/n.
Substituting (5.5-4) into (5.5-3) thus relates the refractive index n and the absorption
coefficient a to the real and imaginary parts of the susceptibility Хх’ and y”:
la ,
n—-jo—=Vefeo= VI+x' + 5x". (5.5-5)
2 ko Absorption Coefficient
and Refractive Index
Note that the square root in (5.5-5) provides two complex numbers with opposite signs
(phase difference of т). The sign is selected such that if.” is negative, i.e., the medium
is absorbing, then a is positive, i.e., the wave is attenuated. If (1 + x’) is positive, then
the complex number 1 + y+” is in the fourth quadrant, and its square root can be in
either the second or the fourth quadrant. By selecting the value in the fourth quadrant,
we ensure that a is positive, and n is then also positive. Similarly, if (1+-’) is negative,
then 1 + x’ + jy” is in the third quadrant, and its square root is selected to be in the
fourth quadrant so that both a and n are positive. The impedance associated with the
complex susceptibility х, which is also complex, is given by
| Ио То
€ vi+x Impedance
Hence, in the context of our formulation, x, К, е, and 1 are complex quantities
while a, В, and п are real.
Weakly Absorbing Media
In a weakly absorbing medium, we have the condition Хх” < 1+ y’, so that
VIF FIX" = VT FX VIF 95 = VT + X(1 + 556), where 6 = y"/(1 + x’). It
follows from (5.5-5) that
ne/1t+y’ (5.5-7)
К
any”. (5.5-8)
n Weakly Absorbing Medium
Under these circumstances, the refractive index is determined by the real part of
the susceptibility and the absorption coefficient is proportional to the imaginary part
thereof. In an absorptive medium y” is negative so that a is positive whereas in an
amplifying medium Хх” is positive and a: is negative.
ee
EXERCISE 5.5-1
Dilute Absorbing Medium. A nonabsorptive medium of refractive index no serves as host to
a dilute suspension of impurities characterized by susceptibility x = x’ + jx”, where x’ < Тапа

184 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
x” < 1. Determine the overall susceptibility of the medium and demonstrate that the refractive index
and absorption coefficient are given approximately by
пет +2 (5.5-9)
2no
/!
а №. (5.5-10)
No
И
Strongly Absorbing Media
In a strongly absorbing medium, |,”’| >> |1 + y’|, so that (5.5-5) yields n — ja/2k, =
VI = V-IV CX") = £50 — 1) EX"), whereupon
п = V/(—-yx")/2 (5.5-11)
а = 2Ко\/ (—xX")/2. (5.5-12)
Strongly Absorbing Medium
Since Хх” is negative for an absorbing medium, the plus sign of the square root was
selected to ensure that a is positive, and this yields a positive value for n as well.
B. Dispersion
Dispersive media are characterized by a frequency-dependent (and thus wavelength-
dependent) susceptibility х(и), electric permittivity «(v), refractive index n(v), and
speed c,/n(v). Since the angle of refraction in Snell’s law depends on refractive in-
dex, which is wavelength dependent, optical components fabricated from dispersive
materials, such as prisms and lenses, bend light of different wavelengths by different
angles. This accounts for the wavelength-resolving capabilities of refracting surfaces
and for the wavelength-dependent focusing power of lenses (and the attendant chro-
matic aberration in imaging systems). Polychromatic light is therefore refracted into a
range of directions. These effects are illustrated schematically in Fig. 5.5-2.
5 R =
Е G White
Е > White wy a
Bio: i р. B BGR
м В р В
вс в
Wavelength
Figure 5.5-2 Optical components fabricated from dispersive materials refract waves of different
wavelengths by different angles (B = blue, G = green, R = red).

Moreover, by virtue of the frequency-dependent speed of light in a dispersive
medium, each of the frequency components comprising a short pulse of light ex-
periences a different time delay. If the propagation distance through a medium is
substantial, as is often the case in an optical fiber, for example, a brief light pulse at the
input will be substantially dispersed in time so that its width at the output is increased,
as illustrated in Fig. 5.5-3.

The wavelength dependence of the refractive index of some common optical mate-
rials is displayed in Fig. 5.5-4.

5.5 ABSORPTION AND DISPERSION 185
Original Delayed & broadened
pulse pulse
R T B
Dispersive Medium
0 t 0 t
Figure 5.5-3 A dispersive medium serves to broaden a pulse of light because the different
frequency components that constitute the pulse travel at different velocities. In this illustration,
the low-frequency component (long wavelength, denoted R) travels faster than the high-frequency
component (short wavelength, denoted B) and therefore arrives earlier.
25 А$2$3 glass
= SrTiO3
я
©
3 3 AgCl
>
3 Quartz SS MgO CsBr
S р .
315 Е. Silica = ВК7 о [Calcite Са
Nak
1
4 Ge
35 Si
e
я о а TiO? GaAs
% 3 о
R=
2 у
Е 25 ZnSe
Е e — GaN
а о <2
7 e
2 LiNbO3 —
вв — УКР
U
15 о
о КОР
1
0.1 1 Free-space wavelength Ло (шт) 10
Figure 5.5-4 Wavelength dependence of the refractive index of selected optical materials,
including glasses, crystals, and semiconductors. The designations ‘e’ and ‘о’ represent ordinary and
extraordinary refraction, respectively, for anisotropic materials (see Sec. 6.3).
Measures of Dispersion
Material dispersion can be quantified in a number of different ways. For glass optical
components and broad-spectrum light that covers the visible band (white light), a
commonly used measure is the Abbe number У = (ng — 1)/(пе — nc), where np,
па, and пс are the refractive indices of the glass at three standard wavelengths: blue at
486.1 nm, yellow at 587.6 nm, and red at 656.3 nm, respectively. For flint glass У = 38

186 — CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
whereas for fused silica V 68.

On the other hand, if dispersion in the vicinity of a particular wavelength Ло is
of interest, an often used measure is the magnitude of the derivative dn/d, at that
wavelength. This measure is appropriate for prisms, for example, in which the ray
deflection angle 04 is a function of n [see (1.2-6)]. The angular dispersion 49а/ало =
(d0@4/dn)(dn/dX_) is then a product of the material dispersion factor, 4п/АЛо, and
another factor, d0q/dn, that depends on the geometry of the prism and the refractive
index of the material of which it is made.

The effect of material dispersion on the propagation of brief pulses of light is
governed not only by the refractive index n and its first derivative dn/dX,, but also
by the second derivative d?n/dA2, as will be elucidated in Sec. 5.7 and Sec. 23.3.
Absorption and Dispersion: The Kramers—Kronig Relations
Absorption and dispersion are intimately related. Indeed, a dispersive material, 1.е.,
a material whose refractive index is wavelength dependent, must be absorptive and
must exhibit an absorption coefficient that is also wavelength dependent. The relation
between the absorption coefficient and the refractive index is a result of the Kramers—
Kronig relations, which relate the real and imaginary parts of the susceptibility of a
medium, x/(v) and y""(v):

2 [* sx"(s)
x'(v) - | р ds (5.5-13)
oe) /

"(v) = ] хе) a (5.5-14)
п Ys Kramers—Kronig Relations
Given the real or the imaginary component of x(v) for all и, these powerful formulas
allow the complementary component to be determined for all v. The Kramers—Kronig
relations connecting х”(и) and y‘(v) translate into relations between the absorption
coefficient a(1) and the refractive index n(v) by virtue of (5.5-5), which relates a and

nto x” and x’.

The Kramers—Kronig relations are a special Hilbert-transform pair, as can be under-
stood from linear systems theory (see Sec. В.1 of Appendix В). They are applicable
for all linear, shift-invariant, causal systems with real impulse response functions. The
linear system at hand is the polarization-density response of a medium P(t) to an
applied electric field E(t) set forth in (5.2-23). Since E(t) and P(t) are real, so too
is the impulse response function €,x(t). As a consequence, its Fourier transform, the
transfer function €,x(v), exhibits Hermitian symmetry: y(—v) = y*(v) [see Sec. A.1
of Appendix A]. This system therefore obeys all of the conditions required for the
Kramers—Kronig relations to apply. The real and imaginary parts of the transfer func-
tion €,x(v) are therefore related by (B.1-6) and (B.1-7) and, in particular, by (5.5-13)
and (5.5-14).

C. The Resonant Medium

We now set forth a simple classical microscopic theory that leads to a complex suscep-
tibility and provides an underlying rationale for the presence of frequency-dependent
absorption and dispersion in an optical medium. The approach is known as the Lorentz
oscillator model. A more thorough discussion of the interaction of light and matter is
provided in Chapter 14.

5.5 ABSORPTION AND DISPERSION 187

Consider a dielectric medium such as a collection of resonant atoms, in which the
dynamic relation between the polarization density P(t) and the electric field €(t),
considered for a single polarization, is described by a linear second-order ordinary
differential equation of the form

d?P dP
ae toa + we = weeono E, (5.5-15)
t И Resonant Dielectric Medium
where С, wo, and yo are constants.

An equation of this form emerges when the motion of a bound charge associated
with a resonant atom is modeled phenomenologically as a classical harmonic oscillator,
in which the displacement of the charge x(t) and the applied force F(t) are related by

а?т dx 2 F

— — =—. 5.5-16

de +¢ di + Wor = ( )
Here m is the mass of the bound charge, wo = \/к/т is its resonance angular fre-
quency, к is the elastic constant of the restoring force, and C is the damping coefficient.

If the dipole moment associated with each individual atom is р = —ez, the polari-
zation density of the medium as a whole is related to the displacement by P = Np =
— Nez, where —e is the electronic charge and № is the number of atoms per unit volume
of the medium. The electric field and force are related by € = F/(—e). The quantities
P and с are therefore proportional to x and F, respectively, and comparison of (5.5-15)
and (5.5-16) provides

Ne?
хо = ——>- (5.5-17)
Коти
The applied electric field can thus be thought of as inducing a time-dependent electric
dipole moment in each atom, as portrayed in Fig. 5.5-5, and hence a time-dependent
polarization density in the medium as a whole.
&
Figure 5.5-5 A time-varying electric field € applied to а
Г Lorentz-oscillator atom induces a time-varying dipole moment
р that contributes to the overall polarization density P.
5. ® 5%

The medium is completely characterized by из impulse response function €,x(t),
an exponentially decaying harmonic function, or equivalently by its transfer function
€oX(v), which is obtained by solving (5.5-15) one frequency at a time, as follows.
Substituting E(t) = Re{Eexp(jwt)} and P(t) = Re{Pexp(jwt)} into (5.5-15)
yields

(—w? + jlw + wh)P = wdeoxoE, (5.5-18)
from which P = €,[yow?/(w? — w? + 16) Е. Writing this relation in the form P =
€oX(v)E, and substituting w = Эми, yields an expression for the frequency-dependent

188 — CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
susceptibility,
x(v) = хо ; (5.5-19)
yy —? + jv Av Susceptibility
(Resonant Medium)
where V9 = и /2л is the resonance frequency and Av = C/2r.

The real and imaginary parts of х(и), denoted х’(и) and /(v) respectively, are

therefore given by
2 (4,2 2
м (и -и
Ve) = x0 (5.5-20)
(v6 — v2) + (и Av)?
2
и voy Av
(Vv) = -Xo (5.5-21)
(vg — v8)? + (v Av?
These equations are plotted in Fig. 5.5-6.
WW) x") ]
Ди Хо 9
— Av
Xo
Y% и М и
Figure 5.5-6 Real and imaginary parts of the susceptibility of a resonant dielectric medium. The
real part x’(v) is positive below resonance, zero at resonance, and negative above resonance. The
imaginary part х” (и) is negative so that —х” (и) is positive everywhere and has a peak value yoQ at
и = Vp, where Q = 19 /Av. The illustration portrays results for Q = 10.

At frequencies well below resonance (и < м), x/(v) = Хо and x"(v) == 0, so that
the low-frequency susceptibility is simply хо. At frequencies well above resonance
(v > ю), x'(v) = x"(v) = 0 so that the medium behaves like free space. Precisely
at resonance (и = м), Х'(щ) = 0 and —y"(v) reaches its peak value of хоО,
where Q = v/Av. The resonance frequency vp is usually much greater than Av
so that Q >> 1. Thus, the magnitude of the peak value of —х”(и), which is xoQ, is
much larger than the magnitude of the low-frequency value of x/(v), which is yo.
The maximum and minimum values of x/(v) are Ехо Q/(2 = 1/0) and occur at
frequencies мо \/1 + 1/Q, respectively. For large О, x’ swings between positive and
negative values with a magnitude approximately equal to ХоО /2, i.e., one half of the
peak value of y”. The signs of y’ and х” determine the phase of y, which simply
determines the angle between the phasors P and Е.

The behavior of х(и) in the vicinity of resonance (и ~ м) is often of particular
interest. In this region, we may use the approximation (vg — и?) = (v9 +v)(Yp — Vv) =

5.5 ABSORPTION AND DISPERSION 189
2% (м — и) in the real part of the denominator of (5.5-19), and replace v with vp in
the imaginary part thereof, to obtain
V9 /2
~ ^ ИИ 5.5-22
x(v ~ и) Хор, ( )
from which
” мА! 1
А — Хо —— oo 5.5-23
x"(v) © x0 FZ (=v) + (Av ap ( )
ии
y'(v) © 2 xy x" (v). (5.5-24)
и Susceptibility
(Near Resonance)
The function х"(и) in (5.5-23), known as the Lorentzian function, decreases to half
its peak value when |v — щ| = Av/2. The parameter Av therefore represents the
full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) value of х" (м).
The behavior of х(и) far from resonance is also of interest. In the limit |(v — v9) | >>
Av, the susceptibility given in (5.5-19) is approximately real,
И
x(v) = №5, (5.5-25)
ии Susceptibility
(Far from Resonance)
so that the medium exhibits negligible absorption.

The absorption coefficient and the refractive index of a resonant medium may be
determined by substituting the expressions for y‘(v) and y"(v), e.g., (5.5-23) and
(5.5-24) into (5.5-5). Each of these parameters generally depends on both y‘(v) and
х" (к). However, in the special case for which the resonant atoms are embedded in a
nondispersive host medium of refractive index no, and are sufficiently dilute so that
х" (и) and x‘ (и) are both < 1, this dependence is much simpler, namely, the refractive
index and the absorption coefficient are dependent on x’ and x”, respectively. Using
the results of Exercise 5.5-1, it can be shown that these parameters are related by:

(v) anv и (5.5-26)
ay) — | — и .5-
ПО Со x
/
n(v) & ng + XY), (5.5-27)
2no
The dependence of these quantities on и is illustrated in Fig. 5.5-7.
Media with Multiple Resonances
A typical dielectric medium contains multiple resonances corresponding to different
lattice and electronic vibrations. The overall susceptibility arises from a superposition
of contributions from these resonances. Whereas the imaginary part of the suscep-
tibility is confined to frequencies near the resonance, the real part contributes at all
frequencies near and below resonance, as shown in Fig. 5.5-6. This is exhibited in
the frequency dependence of the absorption coefficient and the refractive index, as
illustrated in Fig. 5.5-8. Absorption and dispersion are strongest near the resonance

190 — CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
a(v) nv) Ap
Xo/2
Av м Е 0)
ПН
% и % у
Figure 5.5-7 Absorption coefficient a(v) and refractive index n(v) of a dielectric medium of
refractive index no containing a dilute concentration of atoms of resonance frequency 1.
frequencies. Away from the resonance frequencies, the refractive index is constant and
the medium is approximately nondispersive and nonabsorptive. Each resonance does,
however, contribute a constant value to the refractive index at all frequencies below its
resonance frequency.
Be
6.2
62
<5
7 Figure 5.5-8 Frequency dependence
on of the absorption coefficient a(v) and
Ее \ the refractive index n(v) for a medium
Е В EN ce < none with three resonances.
о 3 р ! :
м Е
io?

Other complex processes can also contribute to the absorption coefficient and the re-
fractive index of a material, so that different patterns of frequency dependence emerge.
Figure 5.5-9 shows an example of the wavelength dependence of the absorption co-
efficient and refractive index for a dielectric material that is essentially transparent at
visible wavelengths. The illustration shows a decreasing refractive index with increas-
ing wavelength in the visible region by virtue of a nearby ultraviolet resonance. The
material is therefore more dispersive at shorter visible wavelengths where the rate of
decrease of the index is greatest. This behavior is not unlike that exhibited in Fig. 5.5-1
and Fig. 5.5-4 for various real dielectric materials.

|x Ultraviolet >| 4/<— Infrared —>|
"5
Absorption |7 Figure 5.5-9 Typical wavelength de-
coefficient a Г pendence of the absorption coefficient
and refractive index for a dielectric
| № medium exhibiting resonant absorption
Refractive | in the ultraviolet and infrared bands,
index n concomitant with low absorption in the
| visible band. In this diagram the abscissa
is wavelength rather than frequency.
i ee ОН НИ НИ Ч
0.01 отп 10 100 № (м)

5.5 ABSORPTION AND DISPERSION 191
The Sellmeier Equation
In a medium with multiple resonances, labeled $ = 1,2,..., the susceptibility is
approximately given by a sum of terms, each of the form of (5.5-25), for frequencies
far from any of the resonances. Using the relation between the refractive index and the
real susceptibility provided in (5.2-13), п? = 1+ y, the dependence of n on frequency
and wavelength assumes a form known as the Sellmeier equation:
2 v? А?
n 21+) хи = 1+ УЖ. (5.5-28)
i ии i А Sellmeier Equation
The Sellmeier equation provides a good description of the refractive index for most
optically transparent materials. At wavelengths for which А < Л; the и term becomes
approximately proportional to Л?, and for Л >> Л; it becomes approximately constant.
As an example, the dispersion in fused silica, illustrated in Example 5.7-1, is well de-
scribed by three resonances. For some materials the Sellmeier equation is conveniently
approximated by a power series.
The Sellmeier equations for a few selected materials, extracted from measured data
using a least-squares fitting algorithm, are provided in Table 5.5-1.
Table 5.5-1 Sellmeier equations for the wavelength dependence of the refractive indices for
selected materials at room temperature. The quantities п, and п. indicate the ordinary and
extraordinary indices of refraction, respectively, for anisotropic materials (see Sec. 6.3). The range of
wavelengths where the results are valid is indicated in the rightmost column.
Material Sellmeier Equation Wavelength
(Wavelength А in wm) Range (ит)
0.69620? 0.40792 0.89752
Fused sili 2 = 14 ——__ 5. ——_____ 4. _—_____ 0.21-3.71
used siica m= 1 * 2 —(0.06840)2 № — (0.11622 | №- (9.89622
10.6684? 0.00302 1.5413 А2
$1 a нниНИВ 1.36-11
' ТА 030157 | 2 — (1.13472 * 2 — (1104.02
7.4969? 1.9347\?
GaAs 2 = 3.5 + —=—___. + ——_.__ 1.4-11
as п № — (0.4082)2 7 № — (877
0.01878
ВВ 2=2. ———_—___ — 0.01354)? 22-1,
O ns 7359 + 55 001825 0.01354 0 06
0.01224
2 = 2.3753 + — 0.01516)?
пе 1 № — 0.01667
1.2566А2 33.8991?
KDP 2=14 ——__. + ———_——.,; 0.4—1.06
ТТ № 0.091912 | X2 — (33.3752)
> 1.1311)? 5.75682
n2 = 1 + ———___ 5. ——_____
№2 — (0.09026)? © A? — (28.4913)?
2.5112)? 7.1333\?
LiNbO. 2 — 2.3920 + ———_____.. +. .—______ 0.4-3.1
mes по * 2 (02172 * 2 — (6.502
2.25652 14.503?
2 = 2.3247 + ———____ 5. __—_____
we № — (0.2102 | № — (25.915)?

192 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
5.6 SCATTERING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Previous chapters have described the propagation of optical waves through homo-
geneous media, the reflection and refraction of light at dielectric boundaries, wave
transmission through optical components, and diffraction through apertures. In Sec. 5.5,
we considered the absorption and dispersion of light. We turn now to the scattering
of light, which plays an important role in various domains of optics, including
nanophotonics.

In particular, we examine light scattering from a homogeneous medium containing
localized inhomogeneities, irregularities, material defects, grains, or suspended parti-
cles. Both the medium and the scatterers are assumed to be dielectrics with linear and
isotropic optical properties. The scattering from a small metal sphere is considered in
Sec. 8.2C and various forms of light scattering are discussed in Sec. 14.5С.

A. Born Approximation

When an optical wave traveling in a given direction in a homogeneous medium en-
counters an object with different optical properties, the wave is scattered into other
directions. This effect may be analyzed by solving Maxwell’s equations and applying
the appropriate boundary conditions. However, analytical solutions of this problem
exist only in few ideal cases. We therefore resort to a commonly used approximate
approach for solving such problems, known as the Born approximation. It is appli-
cable for weak scattering, i.e., when the scattering object may be regarded as a small
perturbation to the relative permittivity (or other optical properties) of the medium.

To introduce the Born approximation, it is convenient to first address the scattering
of a scalar wave and then to subsequently consider an electromagnetic wave. The scalar
complex amplitude U(r) obeys the Helmholtz equation (2.2-7),

[М + k?(r)] U =0, (5.6-1)
where inside the scattering object the wavenumber is k(r) = К.(г) and in the host
medium, which is taken to be uniform, the wavenumber is k(r) = К. By writing
k?(r) = k? + [k?(r) — k?], (5.6-1) may be rewritten as the Helmholtz equation for
the scattered complex amplitude U,(r),

(V? +k?) 0. = —S, (5.6-2)
with a source

S(r) = [k2(r) — Е? U,(r) (5.6-3)
that is localized within the volume V of the scatterer, and is zero outside of it. As will
be justified shortly, the solution to (5.6-2) is

U, g(r) ay 5.6-4

«= ror (5.6-4)

at positions г outside the volume У. However, the integral in (5.6-4) cannot be readily

evaluated to determine U,(r) since, in accordance with (5.6-3), the source S(r’) itself
depends on the wave U,(r), which is unknown.

If the scattering is weak, however, it is safe to assume that the incident wave Up(r)
is essentially unaffected by the process of scattering within the volume V, in which

5.6 SCATTERING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 193
case the complex amplitude U,(r) in the expression for the scattering source (5.6-3)
may be approximated by the incident complex amplitude Up(r), whereupon
S(r) = [k2(r) — Е? Uo(r). (5.6-5)
This expression may then be used in (5.6-4) to determine the scattered complex ampli-
tude U,(r). Implicit in the assumption of weak scattering is the condition that a wave
scattered from one point in the scattering volume V is not subsequently scattered from
another point, i.e., multiple scattering is a negligible second-order effect.

It is evident from (5.6-4) that the scattered wave U(r) is then approximately а
superposition of spherical waves generated by a continuum of point sources within the
scatterer, as schematized in Fig. 5.6-1. Each point at position r’ creates a spherical
wave with amplitude S(r’) given by the approximate expression (5.6-5). The concept
is similar to that of the Huygens—Fresnel principle of diffraction described in Sec. 4.1D
(see Fig. 4.1-13). In this type of scattering, known as elastic scattering, the frequency
of the scattered light remains the same as that of the incident light.

Scattered
Incident wave Us
wave Ug a
))
Figure 5.6-1 Under the Born approximation,
the scattered wave U,(r) is a superposition of
х spherical waves, each generated by a point in the
Scattering scatterer.
Background object
medium
B. Rayleigh Scattering
Rayleigh scattering involves small scatterers. It is engendered by variations in a
medium that are introduced, for example, by the presence of particles whose sizes
are much smaller than a wavelength or by random inhomogeneities at a scale much
finer than a wavelength.
Weak Scattering: Scalar Waves
If the contrast between the optical properties of the scattering and surrounding media
is low, 1.е., if the scattering is weak, then the Born approximation is applicable.

If we consider a single scattering object, much smaller than the wavelength of light
and located at r = 0, the source distribution in (5.6-5) may be approximated as S(r) =
(Е? — К?) Up V 6(r), where 6(г) is the delta function and К. is the wavenumber within
the small scatterer. Substituting this in the integral provided in (5.6-4) yields

12 12 en jkr
Us = - V Up —— 5.6-6
$ ( 5 ) 0 Arr” ( )
which represents a single spherical wave centered about г = О (the location of the
scatterer), with an amplitude proportional to that of the incident wave Uo.
In accordance with (2.2-10), the intensity of the scattered wave is therefore
у?
ВЕ? = (k2 — k?)? —— Ih, 5.6-7
s = |U;| ( s ) (4nr)? 0 ( )

194 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
where Ip = |0 |2. Since the scalar scattered wave is isotropic, the total scattered power
Р. = 4nr? I, becomes
~ 1 2 2\2 172
Px (УЗ, (5.6-8)
which reveals that the scattered power is proportional to the square of the scatterer
volume У.

Since А. and К are both proportional to w, it is clear from (5.6-8) that the scat-
tered power is proportional to и“ or, in terms of wavelength, to 1/A4. Known as
the Rayleigh inverse fourth-power law, this indicates that incident waves of short
wavelength undergo greater scattering than those of long wavelength. As an example,
the Rayleigh scattering of light at a wavelength of Л, = 400 nm exceeds that of light
at a wavelength of Л, = 800 nm by the factor 2“ = 16. Rayleigh scattering from the
density fluctuations of air, which are finer than the wavelengths of light in the visible
spectral band, is responsible for the blue color of the sky. The short-wavelength (blue)
light is preferentially scattered over a large range of angles, whereas the light arriving
directly from the sun is reduced in blue and therefore appears to have a yellowish
tint. In silica-glass optical fibers, Rayleigh scattering is responsible for the greater
attenuation of visible than infrared light, as discussed in Sec. 10.3A.

Weak Scattering: Electromagnetic Waves

The derivation of the scattered wave considered above was predicated on a scalar
complex amplitude that obeys the Helmholtz equation (5.6-1). The scattering of an
electromagnetic wave may be formulated in a similar manner by beginning with the
vector potential A, which also satisfies the Helmholtz equation. Applying the Born
approximation, the vector potential of the scattered wave may be expressed as a super-
position of dipole waves centered at points within the scatterer, in analogy with (5.6-4).
The vector potential A for an oscillating dipole has the distribution of a spherical wave,
with the associated electric and magnetic complex amplitudes E and H described in
бес. 5.4A.

From an electromagnetic point-of-view, scattering can thus be viewed as the cre-
ation, by the incident field, of a collection of oscillating electric dipoles at all points
within the scatterer, each radiating a dipole wave.

For a single small scatterer at the origin, the scattered electromagnetic wave is
identical to that radiated by a single electric dipole pointing along the direction of
the electric field Eo of the incident wave, as illustrated in Fig. 5.6-2. In the far zone
(r > A), the electric and magnetic fields of the scattered wave point in the polar and
azimuthal directions, respectively, as provided in (5.4-17) and (5.4-18), as well as in
Fig. 5.4-2. The electric-field complex amplitude of the scattered wave is thus given by

пе ~ 2 72
Е, = Exo sin 9 —— 0, Eg = —(k, — k°)V Ep, (5.6-9)
Arr
so that the scattered-wave intensity is
= РУ sin? 0 (5.6-10)
. . (Arr)? , :
where Го is given by (5.4-8). The angular distribution of the scattered wave is thus
independent of ф and assumes the toroidal pattern illustrated in Fig. 5.6-2. The scat-
tering is at a maximum when 9 = 7/2, i.e., when the direction of the scattered wave
is orthogonal to the direction of the electric field of the incident wave. In particular,
back-scattering has the same intensity as forward-scattering.

5.6 SCATTERING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 195
The expression for the electromagnetic intensity given in (5.6-10) differs from that
for the scalar-wave intensity provided in (5.6-7) by the factor sin? 0. This distinction
arises because the oscillating dipole radiates a transverse electromagnetic wave, which
precludes scattering in a direction parallel to the incident electric field, whereas scalar
wave optics does not take polarization into account.
в 9 .
Eo LE  “ Figure 5.6-2 A transverse electromagnetic
т. plane wave with electric field Ep scattered from
i \ a point object (blue circle at center) creates a
к‘ i \ / scattered electric-dipole wave E, with a toroidal
Incident _ IST directional pattern. The scattered intensity I, o
ENG BO a sin’ 9, where 0 is the scattering angle.
Background Scattering
medium object
The total scattered power is calculated by integrating (5.6-10) over the surface of a
sphere. Using the incremental integration area in spherical coordinates, г? sin 0 40 dd,
and noting that |" sin? 0 40 = 4/3, leads to
ae 212 172
РКУ. (5.6-11)
67
The electromagnetic scattered power is thus 2/3 of that obtained in the scalar-wave case,
as provided in (5.6-8). The results differ because of the distinction in the integration
over 9 in the two cases. In the isotropic case the appropriate integration is Io зш 9 dé =
2, whereas in the electromagnetic case the integration yields 4/3, as indicated above,
which is a factor of 2/3 smaller.
It is commonplace to characterize the strength of scattering in terms of a scattering
cross section о.. Writing the total scattered power Ру as the product
Ps = oslo, (5.6-12)
where Jo is the incident light intensity [W/m7?], it is evident that o, may be regarded as
the area of an aperture [m?] that intercepts the incident wave and collects an amount
of power equal to the actual scattered power. Based on (5.6-11), the scattering cross
section under the Born approximation (weak scattering) and the small-scatterer ap-
proximation (Rayleigh scattering) is therefore
1 2
os = — № —k*|V?. (5.6-13)
67
Let us consider a specific example: the scattering cross section of a spherical di-
electric scatterer of radius a and permittivity е. embedded in a dielectric medium of
permittivity «, under the assumption that both media have the same magnetic perme-
ability р. Substituting К = w/e = 27/A, К, = w/e = /e,/€ - 27 /А, and
У = 47a? into (5.6-13), we obtain
2
ВЕ —€ a\4
2 5
Os = ла =-|—— an) . 5.6-14
$ = ло? Qs, a= 5 || (eng (5.6-14)

196 — СНАРТЕВ5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
The scattering cross section of the spherical scatterer is thus given by the product of its
geometrical area, ma, and a small dimensionless factor Qs, known as the scattering
efficiency. The quantity ©. is proportional to the fourth power of the ratio а/Л, where
А is the wavelength of light in the background medium, and to the square of the
contrast factor (5 — €)/€ = (п? — n?)/n?, where п. and п are the refractive indices
of the scatterer and the medium, respectively. Rayleigh scattering is evidently highly
dependent on the size of the scatterer; the scattered power is proportional to the sixth
power of the radius of a spherical scatterer. Of course the validity of these results
requires that the radius of the scatterer be small in comparison with a wavelength.
EXAMPLE 5.6-1. Rayleigh Scattering from a Dielectric Nanosphere. Light of wave-
length Л = 600 nm is scattered from a spherical nanoparticle of radius а = 60 nm and a relative
permittivity that is 10% greater than the background value. Since the а/Л = 0.1, the small-scatterer
condition is satisfied. Also, since the contrast (е. — €)/e = 0.1, the weak-scattering condition is
satisfied. In accordance with (5.6-14), the scattering efficiency is О, = 4.6 x 10-4 and the scattering
cross section is о, ~ 5.2 nm?. Hence, if the intensity of the incident light is Ig = 10° W/m?
(corresponding to a 3-mW laser beam of 100-j.m radius), the scattered power is Р; == 0.52 pW.
Strong Scattering: Nanosphere
The Born approximation is not applicable in the case of strong scattering, i.e., when
the contrast («; — е)/е between the relative permittivities of the scatterer and the
background is not small. However, an alternative method, known as the quasi-static
approximation, may be used to determine the Rayleigh scattered field if the scatterer is
spherical and its a radius much smaller than the optical wavelength, i.e., a nanosphere.
Again, the scattered electric-field complex amplitude Е, is that radiated by an elec-
tric dipole, as in (5.4-15) and (5.4-16). As explained below, in the far zone the field is
described by
—jkr д —
Е. © Eo sind —6, Ey =—4n (==) ka Bo, (5.6-15)
Arr Е; + 2€
and the associated scattering cross section turns out to be approximately given by
—<P 4
o=72Q,, Q=* ase (2n<) . (5.6-16)
3 | és + 2e А Nanosphere
Cross Section
Е, = e, then в, + 2е & Зе, whereupon the weak-scattering results are recovered from
the above equations, i.e., (5.6-15) reproduces (5.6-9), and (5.6-16) reproduces (5.6-14).
These results may be confirmed by applying appropriate boundary conditions at the
surface of the scattering sphere (r = a), namely, matching the tangential components
of the external and internal electric fields E, as well as the normal components of the
displacement fields D, which are products of the permittivities and the electric fields
in each medium (see Fig. 5.1-1). The internal electric field Е; within the scattering
sphere is uniformly distributed, with amplitude
Е = в, (5.6-17)
és + 2€ Nanosphere Internal Field

5.6 SCATTERING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 197
and with a direction that is parallel to the electric field of the incident wave, as shown
in Fig. 5.6-3.

| А Scattered Figure 5.6-3 Scattering of a plane wave
й $97 ^ wave with electric field Eg from а dielectric
a й nanosphere of radius а < Л. The scattered
RS wave E, is identical to the wave radiated
0: Е, by an electric dipole, and the internal field
Fo] a Е, is uniform within the sphere. Boundary
Incident —> conditions dictate that the polar components
wave of Eo + Е, and Е; are equal, and the radial
€s 4 components of «(Ву + E,) and ¢,E; are also
€ Sphere equal. Scattering from a metal nanosphere is
considered in Sec. 8.2С.

The external field is the sum of the incident field Eo and the scattered field E,,
which is a dipole wave. Since the radius of the sphere is taken to be much smaller than
the wavelength of the light (г < Л), at the boundary г = a we have kr < 1. It follows
that points on the sphere lie in the near-field zone of the dipole wave. As a consequence,
the full expression for the electric field of the dipole wave provided in (5.4-15) may be
approximated by the 1/(jkr)? terms. At r = a, the radial and polar components of Е,
are therefore 2(jka)~? (Exo cos 0) (Ата) 1е` 24 and (jka)~?( Ego sin 0) (4па) be J",
respectively. Inserting these expressions in the boundary conditions results in (5.6-16)
and (5.6-17). This solution, which is valid for long wavelengths (A > a), 1.е., low
frequencies, may also be obtained by solving the electrostatic problem of a dielectric
sphere in an applied steady electric field, which explains the appellation quasi-static
approximation.

C. Mie Scattering

For weak scattering, the Born approximation is applicable for scatterers of all sizes,
including those with dimensions comparable to, or larger than, the wavelength of the
incident light. The scattered wave is formulated as an integral of dipole waves centered
at points within the scatterer, and with amplitudes proportional to the local value of
К? (г) — k?, as set forth in Sec. 5.6A. The resultant scattering pattern is sensitive to the
size and shape of the scatterer.

If the Born approximation cannot be used because the scattering is not sufficiently
weak, the problem can be solved analytically for a few special shapes, such as spheres.
This is known as Mie scattering. Quadrupole solutions, which are terms of order
higher than the dipole solutions to the Helmholtz equation that we have considered
thus far, become important for large spheres, which renders the mathematical analysis
more complicated. The directional pattern of the scattering assumes complex, and often
asymmetric, shapes so that scattering in the forward direction can become stronger
than that in the backward direction. For spheres that are large in comparison with the
wavelength, the scattered power turns out to be proportional to the square of the particle
diameter, rather than to the sixth power as for Rayleigh scattering.

Moveover, the strength of Mie scattering is roughly independent of wavelength, in
contrast to Rayleigh scattering, so all wavelengths in white light are scattered approxi-
mately equally. Mie scattering from the water droplets suspended in clouds, which are
comparable in size to the visible wavelengths comprising sunlight, is responsible for
their white (or gray) color. It is also responsible for the white glare around light sources
(such as automobile headlights) in the presence of mist and fog.

198 — CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
D. Attenuation in a Medium with Scatterers
Although the intensity that is Rayleigh scattered from a single scatterer is very small,
the cumulative effect of a large number of scatterers distributed within a medium can
result in significant attenuation. A wave propagating through a homogeneous medium
with an average of №. identical scatterers per unit volume, each with scattering cross
section dg, is attenuated exponentially at a rate a, known as the scattering coefficient:
as = Ngos. (5.6-18)
Scattering Coefficient
This result is derived by considering a plane wave of intensity J traveling along the
z axis of a cylinder with unit cross-sectional area and incremental length Az, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 5.6-4. The incremental slice contains N, Az scatterers, each of which
scatters a small amount of power o,/ away from the z direction. In passing through
this slice, the intensity therefore decreases by the increment AJ = —(N, Az)ogI.
In the limit as Az — 0, this yields dI/dz = —a,I, where ag = Nos, so that the
intensity of the wave decays exponentially at the rate a,, thereby decreasing by the
factor exp(—asz) upon traveling a distance z.
Medium with Absorbing Scatterers
If the scatterers are absorptive as well, then additional attenuation is encountered as the
wave passes through the medium. The overall attenuation coefficient, also called the
intensity extinction coefficient,’ is the sum of the absorption coefficient си, and the
scattering coefficient a,, 1.е., © = A, + Qs.
1 1+ Al Figure 5.6-4 Scattering and ab-
sorption from scatterers embed-
| ded in a nonabsorbing homogenous
medium results in wave extinction.
6 . z+ Az
We proceed to derive an expression for the absorption coefficient a, for а nonab-
sorbing homogeneous medium of real permittivity « in which a concentration of М.
spherical scatterers per unit volume, each of complex permittivity ес. and volume У, is
embedded. The absorptive nature of the scatterers is embodied in the imaginary part of
€s. The complex effective permittivity of the composite medium (the host medium and
the embedded scatterers) is denoted ес. The wavenumbers of the composite and host
media are К. = w,/e€.jt and К = «./ей, which are complex and real, respectively.
Based on (5.5-3) we can therefore write a,/2 = —Im{k.} = —kIm{,/e./e }.
An approximate expression for ес is provided by the weighted average based on the
volume fraction occupied by the scatterers, f = N,V:
ве © (1—f)e + fe, =e + (в, — 6}. (5.6-19)
This expression is valid for a dilute medium (f < 1) with weak scattering (€, * €)
and small scatterers. For small spherical scatterers of arbitrary concentration, and for
1 The field extinction coefficient, in contrast, is the rate at which the field, rather than the intensity, decreases.

57 PULSE PROPAGATION IN DISPERSIVE MEDIA 199
arbitrary values of с. and с, the Maxwell-Garnett mixing rule is applicable:*
Es — € 2(1—f)e+ (1+ 2f)e,
я А. 5.6-20
fe Ser ее (в — 6 7 (2+ f)e+ (1—fhe, ( )
This relation may be derived by noting that the average electric field is E=fE,+
(1 — РЕ and the average displacement is D = fe,E; + (1 — f)eEo, where Е; and
Eo are the internal and external fields, respectively. Using (5.6-17), which provides
E/E, = (с; + 2е) /Зе, and forming the ratio е = D/E, yields the desired result.
In a dilute medium of small spherical scatterers, for which f < 1, (5.6-20) takes the
simpler form
Е; — €
2 ЗЕ. 5.6-21
ее Е + 3fe eb de ( )
If, additionally, the scattering is weak (€, = с), then (5.6-21) reduces to the weighted-
average formula (5.6-19).

If the scatterers are small and dilute, but not necessarily weak, then ее = се + Ae,
where Де < с. In this case, a,/2 = —kIm{,/e./e} = —kIm{(1 + Ae/e)'/7} =
—kIm{1 + Де/2е} = —kIm{Ac/2e} so that a, = —К Па { (ве — €)/e}. With К =
2r/\ and f = N,V = М№.4па3 /3 for spherical scatterers of radius a, use of (5.6-21)
leads to the approximate result

Qa = Neda, о. = па? Qa, О. = —4Im {ars} (27%) ‚ (5.6-22)

és + 2е А Absorption
Coefficient
where oc, is the absorption cross section and the dimensionless factor ©. is the ab-
sorption efficiency. Note that if we use the weighted-average formula (5.6-19) for Ес,
which is valid for dilute, weak, and small scatterers, we obtain an expression for a,
identical to that provided in (5.6-22) except that the factor ¢, + 2€ in Q, is replaced
by 3c. The overall attenuation coefficient a = a, + ag is obtained by combining the
results provided in (5.6-22), (5.6-16), and (5.6-18).
5.7 PULSE PROPAGATION IN DISPERSIVE MEDIA
The propagation of pulses of light in dispersive media is important in many applica-
tions including optical fiber communication systems, as will be discussed in detail in
Chapters 10, 23, and 25. As indicated above, a dispersive medium is characterized by
a frequency-dependent refractive index and absorption coefficient, so that monochro-
matic waves of different frequencies travel through the medium with different veloc-
ities and undergo different attenuations. Since a pulse of light comprises a sum of
many monochromatic waves, each of which is modified differently, the pulse is delayed
and broadened (dispersed in time); in general its shape is also altered. In this section
we provide a simplified analysis of these effects; a detailed description is deferred to
Chapter 23.

* See J. C. Maxwell Garnett, XII. Colours in Metal Glasses and in Metallic Films, Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A, vol. 203, pp. 385-420, 1904; M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge
University Press, 7th expanded and corrected ed. 2002.

200 CHAPTER5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS

Group Velocity
Consider a pulsed plane wave traveling in the z direction through a lossless disper-
sive medium with refractive index n(w). Following the example set forth in Sec. 2.6,
assume that the initial complex wavefunction at z = 0 is U(0,t) = A(t) exp(juot),
where wo is the central angular frequency and A(t) is the complex envelope of the
wave. It will be shown below that if the dispersion is weak, 1.е., if п varies slowly
within the spectral bandwidth of the wave, then the complex wavefunction at a distance
z is approximately U(z,t) = A(t—z/v) exp|jwo(t—z/c)], where с = c,/n(wo) is the
speed of light in the medium at the central frequency, and v is the velocity at which the
envelope travels (see Fig. 5.7-1). The parameter v, called the group velocity, is given
by

1 d
==’ = $, (5.7-1)
v Ww Group Velocity
where 3 = wn(w)/c, is the frequency-dependent propagation constant and the deriva-
tive in (5.7-1), which is often denoted 4’, is evaluated at the central frequency wo. The
group velocity is a characteristic of the dispersive medium, and generally varies with
the central frequency. The corresponding time delay тд = z/v is called the group
delay.
0 <
Pulse at =0 \ \ Pulse at z
Ac expino) АП ИИ A(ez/v) explivg(t2/o)]
0 z/v t
Figure 5.7-1 An optical pulse traveling in a dispersive medium that is weak enough so that
its group velocity is frequency independent. The envelope travels with group velocity v while the
underlying wave travels with phase velocity c.

Since the phase factor exp[jwo(t — z/c)] is a function of t — z/c, the speed of
light с, given by 1/c = 6(wo)/wo, is often called the phase velocity. In an ideal
(nondispersive) medium, G(w) = w/c whereupon v = с and the group and phase
velocities are identical.

[С] Derivation of the Formula for the Group Velocity. The proof of (5.7-1) relies on a Fourier de-
composition of the envelope A(t) into its constituent harmonic functions. A component of frequency
О, assumed to have a Fourier amplitude A(Q), corresponds to a monochromatic wave of frequency
Ww = wo + 2 traveling with propagation constant 8 (о + 2). This component of the pulsed plane
wave therefore travels as A(Q) exp{—j[6(wo + 2)]z} exp[j(wo + Q)t]. If B(w) varies slowly near
the central frequency wo, it may be approximately linearized via a two-term Taylor series expansion:
B(wo +9) = B(wo) HQ dB/dw = wo/e+Q/v. The Q component of the complex wavefunction may
therefore be approximated by A(Q) exp[jQ(t—z/v)] exp[jwo (t—z/c)]. It follows that, upon traveling
a distance z, the envelope of the Fourier component A(Q) exp(jQt) becomes A(Q) exp[jQ(t—z/v)]
for every value of 9; thus the pulse envelope A(t) becomes A(t — z/v). The pulse therefore travels
at the group velocity v = 1/(d8/dw), in accordance with (5.7-1). a

5.7 PULSE PROPAGATION IN DISPERSIVE MEDIA = 201
Since the index of refraction of most materials is typically measured and tabulated
as a function of optical wavelength rather than frequency, it is convenient to express the
group velocity v in terms of (Ло). Using the relations В = шп(Ло) /со = 2mn(Ao)/o
and Ло = 27c,/w in (5.7-1), along with the chain rule dB/dw = (dG/dA,)(dr,/dw),
provides
Co dn
v= — М = п(Ло) — Ao - (5.7-2)
N dXo Group Velocity and
Group Index
The derivative dn/dX, in (5.7-2) is evaluated at the central wavelength Ло. The param-
eter № is often called the group index.
Group Velocity Dispersion (GVD)
Since the group velocity v = 1/(dG/dw) is itself often frequency dependent, different
frequency components of the pulse undergo different delays тд = z/v. As а result,
the pulse spreads in time. This phenomenon is known as group velocity dispersion
(GVD). To estimate the spread associated with GVD it suffices to note that, upon
traveling a distance z, two identical pulses of central frequencies v and v + dv suffer a
differential group delay
d d
6p = Чик (=) би = Р,=би, (5.7-3)
dv dv \v
where the quantity
а (1
D, = — (;) = 278" (5.7-4)
dv \v Dispersion Coefficient
is called the dispersion coefficient and В” = d?6/dw?|,,,. This effect is actually
associated with the higher-order terms in the Taylor series expansion of 3(w) that were
neglected in the derivation of the group velocity carried out above; a more complete
treatment will be provided in Chapter 23.
If the pulse has an initial spectral width с’, (Hz), in accordance with (5.7-3) a good
estimate of its temporal spread is then provided by
o, = |D,|ovz. (5.7-5)
Pulse Spread
The dispersion coefficient D, is a measure of the pulse-time broadening per unit
distance per unit spectral width (s/m-Hz). This temporal broadening process is illus-
trated schematically in Fig. 5.7-2. If the refractive index is specified in terms of the
wavelength, n(A,), then (5.7-2) and (5.7-4) give
АЗ а?
D, =o. (5.7-6)
со dX, Dispersion Coefficient
(s/m-Hz)

202 CHAPTERS ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS
“of | = В <= <
t t t
0 <1 = <
Figure 5.7-2 The temporal spread of an optical pulse traveling in a dispersive medium is
proportional to the product of the dispersion coefficient D,, the spectral width o,, and the distance
traveled z.

It is also common to define a dispersion coefficient Гл in terms of the wave-
length’ instead of the frequency. Using D, d\ = D, dv yields Dy, = D, dv/dA, =
О, (—co/2), which leads directly to

Ло dn
Dy = -—-5. (5.7-7)
Co АА Dispersion Coefficient
(s/m-nm)
In analogy with (5.7-5), for a source of spectral width a the temporal broadening of a
pulse of light is
т = |Dy|ox2. (5.7-8)
Pulse Spread
As discussed in Secs. 10.3, 23.3, and 25.1, D) is usually specified in units of ps/km-
nm in fiber-optics applications: the pulse broadening is measured in picoseconds, the
length of the medium in kilometers, and the source spectral width in nanometers.
Normal and Anomalous Dispersion
Although the sign of the dispersion coefficient D, (ог Гл) does not affect the pulse-
broadening rate, it does affect the phase of the complex envelope of the optical pulse.
As such, the sign can play an important role in pulse propagation through media
consisting of cascades of materials with different dispersion properties, as examined
in Chapter 23. If D, > 0 (О) < 0), the medium is said to exhibit normal dispersion.
In this case, the travel time for higher-frequency components is greater than the travel
time for lower-frequency components so that shorter-wavelength components of the
pulse arrive later than longer-wavelength components, as illustrated schematically in
Fig. 5.7-3. ШО, < 0 (D) > 0), the medium is said to exhibit anomalous disper-
sion, in which case the shorter-wavelength components travel faster and arrive earlier.
Most glasses exhibit normal dispersion in the visible region of the spectrum; at longer
wavelengths, however, the dispersion often becomes anomalous.
Single-Resonance Medium
The group velocity and dispersion coefficient for an optical pulse propagating through
a single-resonance medium is determined by substituting (5.5-20) and (5.5-21) into
1 An alternative definition of the dispersion coefficient, М = —Dy, is also widely used in the literature.

57 PULSE PROPAGATION IN DISPERSIVE MEDIA 208
ЛАМ
, В, В
к 4
\
1 B"> 0, Dy > 0, Бл<0
NN A
1 В ‚К
м \\
\
{ B"< 0, D)< 0, Dy > 0
Figure 5.7-3 Propagation of an optical pulse through media with normal and anomalous
dispersion. In a medium with normal dispersion the shorter-wavelength components of the pulse
(B) arrive later that those with longer wavelength (R). A medium with anomalous dispersion exhibits
the opposite behavior. The pulses are said to be chirped since the instantaneous frequency is time
varying.
(5.5-5) and making use of (5.7-2) and (5.7-7). To illustrate the behavior of the pulse in
this medium, the wavelength dependence of the refractive index п, the group index №,
and the dispersion coefficient Г)», are plotted in Fig. 5.7-4 as a function of normalized
wavelength Л/Ло, for a medium with parameters yo = 0.05 and Av /vp = 0.1.
1.2
25 of | Fs tt} ine sical рае а with a
Ww
о single-resonance medium plotted аз a func-
, tion of the wavelength normalized to the
э= а А TPN LT wavelength at the ‘resonance frequenc
28 4 i th at the | quency,
&2 dt oe NE ии Л/Ло: the refractive index n = c,/c (dots
a indicate points of inflection), the group
o¢ 1 | | TT О О index N = c,/v (dots indicate maxima),
10 : : .
& [| and the dispersion coefficient Ох (dots
8 = 5 АН indicate zeros). The parameters N and D)
оо $< or are not meaningful near resonance (shaded
ЕЕ
= Бы
1S)
195 06 01 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Normalized wavelength Л/Ло
In the vicinity of the resonance (shaded area in figure), n varies sufficiently rapidly
with wavelength that the parameters N and Г)», which are defined on the basis of
a Taylor-series approximation comprising a few terms, cease to be meaningful. Away
from the resonance, on both sides thereof, the refractive index decreases monotonically
with increasing wavelength and exhibits points of inflection (indicated by dots). The
first derivative of the refractive index achieves local maxima at these locations so that
the group index № attains its maximum values there. Moreover, the second derivative
vanishes at these points so that the dispersion coefficient changes sign. As the wave-
length approaches the resonance wavelength from below, the dispersion changes from
anomalous to normal; the reverse is true as the wavelength approaches resonance from
above, as is evident in Fig. 5.7-4.

204 CHAPTERS ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS

Fast and Slow Light in Resonant Media

As is evident in Fig. 5.7-4, in a resonant medium the refractive index п, and the group
index № undergo rapid changes near the resonance frequency, and may be substantially
greater or smaller than unity. Consequently, the phase velocity c = c,/n and the group
velocity о = co/N may be significantly less than, or greater than, the velocity of
light in free space, со. The group index, and hence the group velocity, may even be
negative. This raises the question of a potential conflict with causality and the special
theory of relativity, which provides that information cannot be transmitted at a velocity
greater than c,. It turns out that there is no such conflict since neither the group velocity
nor the phase velocity corresponds to the information velocity, which is the speed at
which information is transmitted between two points. The information velocity may be
determined by tracing the propagation of a nonanalytic point on the pulse, for example,
the onset of a rectangular pulse. It cannot exceed со.

The concepts of phase and group velocity were considered earlier in the context
of an optical pulse traveling in a weakly dispersive medium, i.e., a medium with
propagation constant В (и) that is approximately linear in the vicinity of the central
frequency of the pulse, wo. After traveling a distance z, the pulse is delayed by a time
z/v and is modulated by a phase factor exp(—jwoz/c). This phase, which travels at
the phase velocity с, carries no information. It is the group velocity v that governs
the time of “arrival” of the pulse. Since, in this approximation, the pulse envelope
maintains its shape as it travels (Fig. 5.7-1), the group velocity is a good approximation
of the information velocity. In the resonant medium, this occurs at wavelengths far from
resonance, where the group index is greater than unity and the group velocity is less
than со.

At frequencies closer to resonance, higher-order dispersion terms become appre-
ciable. In the presence of second-order dispersion (GVD), but negligible higher-order
dispersion, a Gaussian pulse, for example, remains Gaussian, albeit with an increased
width; its peak travels at the group velocity v. However, since the Gaussian pulse has
a continuous profile and infinite support (i.e., extends over all time), the velocity at
which the peak travels is not necessarily the information velocity; indeed, it can be
greater than the free-space speed of light.

In the immediate vicinity of resonance, where the group velocity can be significantly
greater than c, and can even be negative (Fig. 5.7-4), higher-order dispersion terms
must be considered. The pulse shape can then be significantly altered and the group
velocity can no longer be considered as a possible information velocity. For sufficiently
short distances, however, the pulse may travel without a significant alteration in shape,
and this may occur at a group velocity significantly higher than c,. The pulse can also
travel at a negative group velocity, signifying that a point on the pulse, identified by
a peak for example, arrives at the end of the medium before the corresponding point
on the input pulse even enters the medium! In the opposite limit of slow light, certain
special resonance media permit the group velocity of light to be made exceedingly
small so that a light pulse may be substantially slowed or even halted. It should be
emphasized, however, that in none of these situations does the information velocity
exceed со.

Since fast- and slow-light phenomena can only be observed near resonance, where
the absorption coefficient is large (and frequency dependent), a mechanism for optical
amplification is necessary, and nonlinear effects are often exploited to enhance this
phenomenon.

EXAMPLE 5.7-1. Dispersion т a Multi-Resonance Medium: Fused Silica. In the
region between 0.21 and 3.71 рим, the wavelength dependence of the refractive index п, for fused
silica at room temperature is well characterized by the Sellmeier equation (5.5-28). Expressing all
wavelengths in ym, this is achieved using three resonance wavelengths at Л, = 0.06840 um, Az =

READING LIST 205
0.1162 yum, and Аз = 9.8962 wm, with weights yo; = 0.6962, хо2 = 0.4079, and хоз = 0.8975,
respectively. Expressions for the group index N and the dispersion coefficient Л)» are readily derived
from this equation by means of (5.7-2) and (5.7-7). The results of this calculation in the 600—1600-nm
wavelength range are presented in Fig. 5.7-5.
1.48
147
х
Е
> 146
2
- ee
м
1.44
40
Е и] Роше 5.7-5 Wavelength depen-
= dence of optical parameters for fused
3 40 silica calculated on the basis of the
3 Е _80 Dy Sellmeier equation (5.5-28): the re-
ЕЕ fractive index п = c,/c (dot ша
ва 120 о | Anomalous cates point of inflection), the group
В” -160 Normal dispersion | dispersion index № = c,/v (dot indicates min-
A жж imum), and the dispersion coefficient
Dy (dot indicates zero).
06 07 08 09 1 11 12 13 14 15 16
Wavelength Л, (ит)

The refractive index п is seen to decrease monotonically with increasing wavelength, and to
exhibit a point of inflection at Л, = 1.276 ит. At this wavelength, the group index N is minimum
so that the group velocity v = c,/N is maximum. Since the dispersion coefficient ДО» is proportional
to the second derivative of n with respect to \,, it vanishes at this wavelength. Zero dispersion
coefficient signifies minimal pulse broadening. At wavelengths shorter than 1.276 ит, D) < 0 and
the medium exhibits normal dispersion whereas at longer wavelengths, О» > 0 and the dispersion is
anomalous. The presence of a zero-dispersion wavelength offers significant advantages in the design
of optical fiber communication systems in which optical pulses carry information, as will become
evident in Secs. 10.3, 25.1, and 23.3. The silica-glass fibers used in such systems are doped and
exhibit zero dispersion close to 1.312 jzm. The group index М is seen to be larger than the refractive
index n by ~ 2%, as is common in many materials.
ии |

READING LIST
Electromagnetics
See also the reading list on general optics in Chapter 1.
J.-M. Liu, Principles of Photonics, Cambridge University Press, 2016.
N. Ida, Engineering Electromagnetics, Springer-Verlag, 3rd ed. 2015.
J. С. Rautio, The Long Road to Maxwell’s Equations, JEEE Spectrum, vol. 51, по. 12, pp. 36-40 &

54—56, 2014.

ЕТ. Ulaby and U. Ravaioli, Fundamentals of Applied Electromagnetics, Prentice Hall, 7th ed. 2014.
М. М. О. Sadiku, Elements of Electromagnetics, Oxford University Press, 6th ed. 2014.
U. S. Inan, A. Inan, and R. Said, Engineering Electromagnetics and Waves, Prentice Hall, 2nd ed.

2014.

A. Zangwill, Modern Electrodynamics, Cambridge University Press, 2013.
D. Fleisch, A Student’s Guide to Maxwell’s Equations, Cambridge University Press, 2013.

206 CHAPTER 5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS

A. Balanis, Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2012.

V. Lucarini, J. J. Saarinen, K.-E. Peiponen, and E. M. Vartiainen, Kramers—Kronig Relations in
Optical Materials Research, Springer-Verlag, 2005.

S. A. Akhmanov and S. Yu. Nikitin, Physical Optics, Oxford University Press, 1997.

Electromagnetics Classics

J. О. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, Wiley, 3rd ed. 1999.

S. Ramo, J. R. Whinnery, and T. Van Duzer, Fields and Waves in Communication Electronics, Wiley,
3rd ed. 1994.

H. A. Haus and J. R. Melcher, Electromagnetic Fields and Energy, Prentice Hall, 1989.

H. A. Haus, Waves and Fields in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall, 1984.

L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, and L. P. Pitaevskii, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media, Nauka
(Moscow), 2nd ed. 1982; Butterworth—Heinemann, 2nd English ed. 1984, reprinted 2004.

L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Nauka (Moscow), 6th revised ed.
1973; Butterworth—Heinemann, 4th revised English ed. 1975, reprinted with corrections 2000.

J. A. Stratton, Electromagnetic Theory, McGraw-Hill, 1941; Wiley-IEEE Classic reissue 2007.

H. A. Lorentz, The Theory of Electrons and Its Applications to the Phenomena of Light and Radiant
Heat, Teubner, 1906; Dover, reissued 2004.

O. Heaviside, Electromagnetic Theory, “The Electrician” Printing and Publishing (London), 1893.

J.C. Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, Macmillan/Clarendon Press (Oxford), 1873.

Vector Beams

Q. Zhan, ed., Vectorial Optical Fields, World Scientific, 2014.

R. Dorn, S. Quabis, and G. Leuchs, Sharper Focus for a Radially Polarized Light Beam, Physical
Review Letters, vol. 91, 233901, 2003.

D. G. Hall, Vector-Beam Solutions of Maxwell’s Wave Equation, Optics Letters, vol. 21, pp. 9-11,
1996.

Optical Constants

P. Hartmann, Optical Glass, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2014.

M. Bass and V. N. Mahajan, eds., Handbook of Optics, McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed. 2010.

А. К. Hilton, Sr., Chalcogenide Glasses for Infrared Optics, McGraw-Hill, 2010.

Е. О. Palik, ed., Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids Ш, Academic Press, 1998.

Y.-M. Chiang, D. Birnie III, and W. D. Kingery, Physical Ceramics: Principles for Ceramic Science
and Engineering, Wiley, 1997.

W. L. Wolfe and G. J. Zissis, eds., The Infrared Handbook, Environmental Research Institute of
Michigan, revised ed. 1993.

Fast and Slow Light

J. B. Khurgin and R. S. Tucker, eds., Slow Light: Science and Applications, CRC Press/Taylor &
Francis, 2009.

P. W. Milonni, Fast Light, Slow Light and Left-Handed Light, Taylor & Francis, 2005.

L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation and Group Velocity, Academic Press, 1960.

Light Scattering

J. A. Adam, Rays, Waves, and Scattering: Topics in Classical Mathematical Physics, Princeton
University Press, 2017.

G. Gouesbet and G. Gréhan, Generalized Lorenz-Mie Theories, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2017.

B. Chu, Laser Light Scattering: Basic Principles and Practice, Dover, paperback 2nd ed. 2007.

M. Nieto-Vesperinas, Scattering and Diffraction in Physical Optics, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2006.

H. M. Nussenzveig, Diffraction Effects in Semiclassical Scattering, Cambridge University Press,
1992, paperback ed. 2006.

L. Tsang, J. A. Kong and K-H. Ding, Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves: Theories and Applica-
tions, Wiley, 2000.

PROBLEMS 207
B. J. Berne and R. Pecora, Dynamic Light Scattering: With Applications to Chemistry, Biology, and
Physics, Wiley, 1976; Dover, reissued 2000.

M. I. Mishchenko, J. W. Hovenier, and L. D. Travis, eds., Light Scattering by Nonspherical Particles:
Theory, Measurements, and Applications, Academic Press, 2000.

М. Kerker, ed., Selected Papers on Light Scattering, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 4), 1988.

C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles, Wiley, 1983,
paperback ed. 1998.

H. C. van de Hulst, Light Scattering by Small Particles, Wiley, 1957; Dover, reissued 1981.

Optical Pulse Propagation

K. E. Oughstun, Electromagnetic and Optical Pulse Propagation 1: Spectral Representations in

Temporally Dispersive Media, Springer-Verlag, 2007, paperback ed. 2010.
PROBLEMS

5.1-1 An Electromagnetic Wave. An electromagnetic wave in free space has an electric-field
vector & = f(t — z/co)X, where X is a unit vector in the x direction, and f(t) =
exp(—t?/7?) exp(j2mvpt), where т is a constant. Describe the physical nature of this
wave and determine an expression for the magnetic-field vector.

5.2-1 Dielectric Media. Identify the media described by the following equations, with respect to
linearity, dispersiveness, spatial dispersiveness, and homogeneity. Assume that all media are
isotropic.

(а) P=e,xE —aV x E,

(b) P+ aP? = в,

(с) ay д??/0Р + а. OP/Ot + P = EoxE,

(9) P = e,{a; + a exp[—(x? + у2)]} 6,

where x, а, ал, and а> are constants.

5.3-1 Traveling Standing Wave. The electric-field complex-amplitude vector for a monochro-
matic wave of wavelength A, traveling in free space is Е(г) = Ро sin(Gy) exp(—j8z) X.
(a) Determine a relation between В and Ло.

(b) Derive an expression for the magnetic-field complex-amplitude vector H(r).

(c) Determine the direction of the flow of optical power.

(d) This wave may be regarded as the sum of two TEM plane waves. Determine their direc-
tions of propagation.

5.4-1 Electric Field of Focused Light.

(a) 1 W of optical power is focused uniformly on a flat target of size 0.1 x 0.1 mm? placed
in free space. Determine the peak value of the electric field Ey (V/m). Assume that the
optical wave is approximated as a TEM plane wave within the area of the target.

(b) Determine the electric field at the center of a Gaussian beam (the point on the beam
axis located at the beam waist) if the beam power is 1 W and the beam waist radius
Wo = 0.1 mm (refer to Sec. 3.1).

5.5-2 Amplitude-Modulated Wave in a Dispersive Medium. An amplitude-modulated wave
whose complex wavefunction takes the form A(t) = [1 + mcos(27f,t)] exp(j2mvot) at z =
0, where №, < мо, travels a distance z through a dispersive medium of propagation constant
B(v) and negligible attenuation. If В(%) = Во, B(vo — fs) = G1, and В(м +f.) = В»,
derive an expression for the complex envelope of the transmitted wave as a function of до,
Bi, В2, and =. Show that at certain distances z the wave is amplitude modulated with no
phase modulation.

5.7-1 Group Velocity Dispersion in a Medium Described by the Sellmeier Equation.

(a) Derive expressions for the group index N and the group velocity dispersion coefficient
D) for a medium whose refractive index is described by the Sellmeier equation (5.5-28).

208 CHAPTER 5 ELECTROMAGNETIC OPTICS

(b) Plot the wavelength dependence of п, №, and О» for fused silica in the region between
0.25 and 3.5 wm. Make use of the parameters provided in Table 5.5-1 (and in Exam-
ple 5.7-1). Verify the curves provided in Fig. 5.7-5.

(c) Construct a similar collection of plots for GaAs in the region between 1.5 and 10.5
jum. As indicated in Table 5.5-1, in the wavelength region between 1.4 and 11 ym, at
room temperature, GaAs is characterized by a 3-term Sellmeier equation with resonance
wavelengths at 0 wm, 0.4082 um, and 37.17 ит, with associated weights given by 3.5,
7.4969, and 1.9347, respectively. Compare and contrast the behavior of the dispersion
properties of fused silica with those of GaAs.

5.7-2 Refractive Index of Air. The refractive index of air can be precisely measured with the help
of a Michelson interferometer and a tunable light source. At atmospheric pressure, and a
temperature of 20° С, the refractive index of air differs from unity by п — 1 = 2.672 x 10-4
at a wavelength of 0.76 ym, by п — 1 = 2.669 x 10~* at a wavelength of 0.81 jum, and by
п — 1 = 2.665 x 10~* at a wavelength of 0.86 ит.

(a) Using a quadratic fit to these data, determine the wavelength dependence of the group
velocity.

(b) Obtain an expression for the dispersion coefficient О» in ps/km-nm and compare your
result with that for a silica optical fiber.

CHAPTER
с [
6.1 POLARIZATION OF LIGHT 211

A. Polarization

B. Matrix Representation
6.2 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION 221
6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 227

A. Refractive Indices

B. Propagation Along a Principal Axis

C. Propagation in an Arbitrary Direction

D. Dispersion Relation, Rays, Wavefronts, and Energy Transport

E. Double Refraction
6.4 OPTICAL ACTIVITY AND MAGNETO-OPTICS 240

A. Optical Activity

B. Magneto-Optics: The Faraday Effect
6.5 OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS 244
6.6 POLARIZATION DEVICES 247

А. Polarizers

B. Wave Retarders

C. Polarization Rotators

D. Nonreciprocal Polarization Devices
The French physicist Augustin-Jean Fresnel Sir George Gabriel Stokes (1819-1903), an
(1788-1827) put forth a transverse wave Irish mathematician and physicist, developed a
theory of light. Equations describing the par- description of light that encompasses intensity
tial reflection and refraction of light are named as well as state of polarization. He also made
in his honor. Fresnel also made important seminal contributions to wave optics, fluores-
contributions to the theory of light diffraction. cence, and optical aberrations.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa Е. A. Saleh and Malvin Сай Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

209

ee
The polarization of light at a given position in space is determined by the path taken
by its electric-field vector E(r,t) in time. In a simple medium, this vector lies in
a plane tangential to the wavefront at that position. For monochromatic light, any
two orthogonal components of the complex-amplitude vector E(r) in that plane vary
sinusoidally in time, with amplitudes and phases that generally differ, so that the
endpoint of the vector E(r) traces out an ellipse. Since the directions of the wavefront
normals are generally position-dependent, so too are the tangential planes, along with
the orientations and shapes of the ellipses, as illustrated in Fig. 6.0-1(a).

For a plane wave, however, the wavefronts are parallel transverse planes and the
polarization ellipses are the same everywhere, as illustrated in Fig. 6.0-1(6), although
the field vectors need not be parallel at any given time. A plane wave is therefore
described by a single ellipse and is said to be elliptically polarized. The orientation
and ellipticity of the polarization ellipse determine the state of polarization of the plane
wave, while its size is established by the optical intensity. When the ellipse reduces to a
straight line or becomes a circle, the wave is said to be linearly polarized or circularly
polarized, respectively.

y y
Е
Xx, x
< <
(a) Wavefronts (b) _ Wavefronts |
Figure 6.0-1 Trace of the time course of the electric-field vector endpoint for monochromatic light
at several positions. (a) Arbitrary wave. (5) Plane or paraxial wave traveling in the z direction.

In paraxial optics, light propagates along directions that lie within a narrow cone
centered about the optical axis (the z axis). Waves are approximately transverse elec-
tromagnetic (TEM) in character and the electric-field vectors therefore lie approxi-
mately in transverse planes, with negligible axial components. From the perspective of
polarization, paraxial waves may be approximated by plane waves and described by a
single polarization ellipse (or line or circle).

Polarization plays an important role in the interaction of light with matter as attested
to by the following examples:

= The proportion of light reflected at the boundary between two materials depends

on the polarization of the incident wave.

= The proportion of light absorbed by certain materials is polarization-dependent.

= Light scattering from matter is generally polarization-sensitive.

= The refractive index of anisotropic materials depends on the polarization. Waves

with different polarizations travel at different velocities and undergo different

phase shifts, so that the polarization ellipse is modified as the wave advances

(linearly polarized light can be transformed into circularly polarized light, as a

simple example). This feature finds use in the design of many optical devices.
210

6.1 POLARIZATION OF LIGHT 211
= The polarization plane of linearly polarized light is rotated by passage through
certain materials, including optically active media, liquid crystals, and some sub-
stances in the presence of an external magnetic field.
This Chapter
This chapter is devoted to a description of elementary polarization phenomena and a
number of their applications. Elliptically polarized light is introduced in Sec. 6.1 using
a matrix formalism that is convenient for describing polarization devices. Section 6.2
describes the effect of polarization on the reflection and refraction of light at bound-
aries between dielectric media. The propagation of light through anisotropic media
(crystals), optically active media, and liquid crystals are the topics of Secs. 6.3, 6.4, and
6.5, respectively. Finally, elementary polarization devices (such as polarizers, retarders,
rotators, and isolators) are discussed in Sec. 6.6. Polarization is important for under-
standing how light behaves in photonic crystals, metals, and metamaterials (Chapters 7
and 8), and how light is guided (Chapters 9 and 10) and stored (Chapter 11). The
polarization properties of random light are considered in Sec.12.4. Polarization clearly
plays a central role in many areas of optics and photonics.
6.1 POLARIZATION OF LIGHT
A. Polarization
Consider a monochromatic plane wave of frequency и and angular frequency w = 27v
traveling in the z direction with velocity с. The electric field lies in the x—y plane and
is generally described by
E(z, t) = Ве { Aexp [бе (1-=)]}, (6.1-1)
С
where the complex envelope
A=A,x+ Ayy, (6.1-2)
is a vector with complex components A, and Ау. To describe the polarization of this
wave, we trace the endpoint of the vector E(z,t) at each position z as a function of
time.
Polarization Ellipse
Expressing A, and A, in terms of their magnitudes and phases, A, = a, exp(jyz)
and A, = a, exp( ры, and substituting into (6.1-2) and (6.1-1) we obtain
E(z,t) = €,k + yy, (6.1-3)
where р
С; = а. COS lw (i — =) + Pa (6.1-4a)
с
Ey = ay cos [w (#— =) ++ (6.1-4b)
с
are the x and у components of the electric-field vector & (2, #). The components €,, and
€,, are periodic functions of ($ — z/c) that oscillate at frequency и. Equations (6.1-4)
are the parametric equations of the ellipse
2 © E,€
— + —2cosp ~* = sin” ф, (6.1-5)
а, ay, az dy

212 CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
where ф = фу — ф. is the phase difference.

At a fixed value of z, the tip of the electric-field vector rotates periodically in the
x-y plane, tracing out this ellipse. At a fixed time $, the locus of the tip of the electric-
field vector traces out a helical trajectory in space that lies on the surface of an elliptical
cylinder (see Fig. 6.1-1). The electric field rotates as the wave advances, repeating its
motion periodically for each distance corresponding to a wavelength \ = c/v.

° » о
РТ.
х d , / <
(a) di = (b)
Figure 6.1-1 (а) Rotation of the endpoint of the electric-field vector in the x—y plane at a fixed
position z. (b) Trajectory of the endpoint of the electric-field vector as the wave advances.

The state of polarization of the wave is determined by the orientation and shape of
the polarization ellipse, which is characterized by the two angles defined in Fig. 6.1-2:
the angle determines the direction of the major axis, whereas the angle x determines
the ellipticity, namely the ratio of the minor to major axes of the ellipse b/a. These
angles depend on the ratio of the complex-envelope magnitudes В = a,/a, , and on
the phase difference ф = фу — Yz , in accordance with the following relations:

y
К о BS GOO
(AL sin 2x = 52 sing, ~ = Py — че. (6.1-7)
> a ax —>

Figure 6.1-2
Polarization ellipse.
Equations (6.1-6) and (6.1-7) may be derived by finding the angle wp that achieves a
transformation of the coordinate system of С, and €, in (6.1-5) such that the rotated
ellipse has no cross term. The size of the ellipse is determined by the intensity of the
wave, which is proportional to |Az|? + |Ay|? = аз + aj.

Linearly Polarized Light
If one of the components vanishes (a, = 0, for example), the light is linearly po-
larized (LP) in the direction of the other component (the y direction). The wave is
also linearly polarized if the phase difference ф = 0 огл, since (6.1-5) then yields
€, = +(a,/a,)E,, which is the equation of a straight line of slope +a,/a, (the +
and — signs correspond to ф = 0 and 7, respectively). In these cases, the elliptical
cylinder in Fig. 6.1-1(5) collapses to a plane, as illustrated in Fig. 6.1-3. The wave is
therefore also said to have planar polarization. As an example, if a; = ау, the plane
of polarization makes an angle of 45° with respect to the x axis. If a, = 0, on the other
hand, the plane of polarization is the y—z plane.

6.1 POLARIZATION ОЕ LIGHT 213
y y
xX
№ «4 Ш
a Plane of polarization
(а) (b)
Figure 6.1-3  Linearly polarized light (also called plane polarized light). (а) Time course of the
field at a fixed position 2. (6) Endpoint of the electric-field vector at position z at a fixed time t.
Circularly Polarized Light
If g = +7/2 and а, = ay = ao, (6.1-4) gives &, = ао cos[w(t — z/c) + yr] and
Ey = Faosin[w(t — 2/с) + ф.|, from which €% + €7 = aj, which is the equation
of a circle. The elliptical cylinder in Fig. 6.1-1(6) becomes a circular cylinder and
the wave is said to be circularly polarized. In the case ф = —7/2, the electric field
at a fixed position z rotates in a counterclockwise direction when viewed from the
direction toward which the wave is approaching. The light is then said to be left
circularly polarized (LCP) [Fig. 6.1-4(a)]. The case р = +7/2 corresponds to
clockwise rotation and right circularly polarized (RCP) light.’ In the left circular
case, the locus traced by the endpoint of the electric-field vector at different positions
is a left-handed helix, as illustrated in Fig. 6.1-4(6). For right circular polarization, it is
a right-handed helix. The helical path of the endpoint of the electric-field vector for the
plane-wave circularly polarized light considered here is to be distinguished from the
helical wavefront of the Laguerre—Gaussian beam discussed in Sec. 3.4 [Fig. 3.4-1(c)].
y Left yA
BN OE Gan

Figure 6.1-4 Motion of the endpoints of the electric-field vectors for left and right circularly
polarized plane waves. (a) Time course at a fixed position z. (b) Trajectories of the endpoints.
Poincaré Sphere and Stokes Parameters
As indicated above, the state of polarization of a light wave can be described by
two real parameters: the magnitude ratio В = a,/a, and the phase difference ф =
Фу — Px. These are sometimes lumped into a single complex number Rexp(jy),
called the complex polarization ratio. Alternatively, we may characterize the state of
polarization by the two angles wp and x, which represent the orientation and ellipticity
of the polarization ellipse, respectively, as defined in Fig. 6.1-2.

* This convention is used in most optics textbooks. The opposite designation is often used in the engineering
literature: in the case of right (left) circularly polarized light, the electric-field vector at a fixed position rotates
counterclockwise (clockwise) when viewed from the direction toward which the wave is approaching.

214 — СНАРТЕВ6 POLARIZATION OPTICS

The Poincaré sphere (see Fig. 6.1-5) is a geometrical construct in which the state
of polarization is represented by a point on the surface of a sphere of unit radius, with
coordinates (т = 1, 9 = 90° — 2x, ф = 24) ш а spherical coordinate system. Each
point on the sphere represents a polarization state. For example, points on the equator
(x = 0°) represent states of linear polarization, with the two points 2ф = 0° and
2) = 180° representing linear polarization along the x and у axes, respectively. The
north and south poles (2x = +90°) represent right-handed and left-handed circular
polarization, respectively. Other points on the surface of the sphere represent states of
elliptical polarization.

y 4 _ из U3 RCP
q ‘LP: 90°
ae [ii ПЕ | ee: os"
Polarizati = и es И
Ellipse orientation a>
р ti Js
uy $ и]
Poincaré Ss
sphere
(a) (b)
Figure 6.1-5 (a) The orientation and ellipticity of the polarization ellipse are represented
geometrically as a point on the surface of the Poincaré sphere. (b) Points on the Poincaré sphere
representing linearly polarized (LP) light at various angles with the x direction, as well as right-
circularly polarized (RCP) and left-circularly polarized (LCP) light. Points in the interior of the sphere
represent partially polarized light (the point at the origin of the sphere represents unpolarized light),
as illustrated in Fig. 12.4-1.

The two real quantities (В, y), or equivalently the angles (x , ip), describe the state
of polarization but contain no information about the intensity of the wave. Another
representation that does contain such information is the Stokes vector. This is a
set of four real numbers (50, $1, 52, 53), called the Stokes parameters. The first
of these, So = а? + ay, is proportional to the optical intensity whereas the other
three, (51, 52, $3), are the Cartesian coordinates of the point on the Poincaré sphere,
(ит, U2, из) = (cos 2x cos 21p, cos 2x sin 2, sin 2x), multiplied by So, so that

$1 = $0 cos 2x cos 21p (6.1-8a)

$2 = 80 cos 2x sin 2p (6.1-8b)

S3 = Sosin 2x. (6.1-8c)

Using (6.1-6) and (6.1-7), together with a few trigonometric identities, the Stokes

parameters in (6.1-8) may be expressed in terms of the field parameters (az, ay, Y),
and in terms of the components of the complex envelope (Ах, Ay), as:

0 = а =|A,|?+|A,|? (6.1-9а)

= а =|A,|? —|A,|? (6.1-9b)

52 = 2a,a, cos p = 2Re{ A? A,} (6.1-9c)

S3 = 2a,a,siny = 2Im{A;A,}. (6.1-9d)

Stokes Parameters

6.1 POLARIZATION OF LIGHT 215
Since 57 + 52 + 53 = 5%, only three of the four components of the Stokes vector
are independent; they completely define the intensity and the state of polarization of
the light. A generalization of the Stokes parameters suitable for describing partially
coherent light is presented in Sec. 12.4.

We conclude that there are a number of equivalent representations for describing
the state of polarization of an optical field: (1) the polarization ellipse; (2) the Poincaré
sphere; and (3) the Stokes vector. Yet another equivalent representation, the Jones
vector, is introduced in the following section.

B. Matrix Representation
The Jones Vector
As indicated above, a monochromatic plane wave of frequency v traveling in the z
direction is completely characterized by the complex envelopes A, = dy, exp(j~zx)
and A, = a,exp(jy,) of the х and у components of the electric-field vector. These
complex quantities may be written in the form of a column matrix known as the Jones
vector:
_ | Аз

J= Я . (6.1-10)
Given J, we can determine the total intensity of the wave, J = (|A,|? + |A,|?)/2n,
and use the ratio R = а,/а„ = |A,|/|A;| and the phase difference ф = yy — Yr =
arg{A,}—arg{A,} to determine the orientation and shape of the polarization ellipse,
as well as the Poincaré sphere and the Stokes parameters.

The Jones vectors for some special polarization states are provided in Table 6.1-1.
The intensity in each case has been normalized so that |A,,.|”+|A,|? = 1 and the phase
of the x component is taken to be y; = 0.

Table 6.1-1 Jones vectors of linearly polarized (LP) and right- and left-circularly polarized (RCP,
LCP) light.
y y
LP in x direction 1 . ‚ LP at angle 9 cos 0
0 x 8 sin 6 9 $
У У
1 [1 1 1
ВСР — |. LCP —- .
Orthogonal Polarizations
Two polarization states represented by the Jones vectors J; and Фо are said to be
orthogonal if the inner product between J, and Jz is zero. The inner product is defined
by
(Ji, J2) = Air Ad, + AtyAd,; (6.1-11)
where Aj, and Алу are the elements of J; and Ag, and Ao, are the elements of Jo.
An example of orthogonal Jones vectors are the linearly polarized waves in the x and

216 CHAPTER 6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
y directions, or any other pair of orthogonal directions. Another example is provided
by right and left circularly polarized waves.
Expansion of Arbitrary Polarization as a Superposition of Two
Orthogonal Polarizations
An arbitrary Jones vector J can always be analyzed as a weighted superposition of
two orthogonal Jones vectors, say J, and J2, that form the expansion basis; thus J =
ayJ1 + а24. If J; and Jy are normalized such that (Ji, Ji) = (Jo,J2) = 1, the
expansion coefficients are the inner products a, = (J, 11) and ay = (J, 32).
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 6.1-1. Expansions т Linearly Polarized and Circularly Polarized Bases.
Using the x and у linearly polarized vectors [1] and [°] as an expansion basis, the expansion
coefficients for a Jones vector of components A, and A, with |A,|? + |A,|? = 1 are, by definition,
a, = A, and a2 = Ау. The same polarization state may be expanded in other bases.
и In a basis of linearly polarized vectors at angles 45° and 135°, 1.е., Jy = Ws [7] and 12 =
> [ ;']. the expansion coefficients a1 and a are:
Ags = (А. + Ay), igs = ~e(Ay — Av) (6.1-12)
45 — V2 © y)s 135 — v2 у т). .
= Similarly, if the right and left circularly polarized waves ws В and ws [2] are used as an
expansion basis, the coefficients a, and ag are:
An=—=(A jA,) A, (А. +jAy) (6.1-13)
R— V2 х J yl) г — v2 x J y)* .
For example, a linearly polarized wave with a plane of polarization that makes an angle 9 with
the т axis (i.e., A, = cos@ and A, = sin@) is equivalent to a superposition of right and
left circularly polarized waves with coefficients wa e~J° and 5 e/°, respectively. A linearly
polarized wave therefore equals a weighted sum of right and left circularly polarized waves.
ПОНИ
НИ
EXERCISE 6.1-1
Measurement of the Stokes Parameters. Show that the Stokes parameters defined in (6.1-9)
for light with Jones vector components A, and A, are given by
So = [Аз + [АР (6.1-14a)
$1 =|A,|? — [Ау (6.1-14b)
$2 = |Aas|? — |Aiss|? (6.1-14c)
S3 = |Ar|’ — |Az|’, (6.1-14d)
where Аль and A135 are the coefficients of expansion in a basis of linearly polarized vectors at angles
45° and 135° as in (6.1-12), and Ав and Аг are the coefficients of expansion in a basis of the right
and left circularly polarized waves set forth in (6.1-13). Suggest a method of measuring the Stokes
parameters for light of arbitrary polarization.
ee

6.1 POLARIZATION OF LIGHT 217
Matrix Representation of Polarization Devices
Consider the transmission of a plane wave of arbitrary polarization through an optical
system that maintains the plane-wave nature of the wave, but alters its polarization, as
illustrated schematically in Fig. 6.1-6. The system is assumed to be linear, so that the
principle of superposition of optical fields is obeyed. Two examples of such systems are
the reflection of light from a planar boundary between two media, and the transmission
of light through a plate with anisotropic optical properties.
Figure 6.1-6 An optical system that alters
Optical the polarization of a plane wave.
system

The complex envelopes of the two electric-field components of the input (incident)
wave, Aj, and Aj,, and those of the output (transmitted or reflected) wave, A», and
Алу, are in general related by the weighted superpositions

Аж=Ти Але + Ть Алу
(6.1-15)
Agy=T1 Аль + To2 Aly,
where 711, Т12, Т21, and 752 are constants describing the device. Equations (6.1-15)
are general relations that all linear optical polarization devices must satisfy.

The linear relations in (6.1-15) may conveniently be written in matrix notation by
defining a 2 x 2 matrix Т with elements T);, 712, T21, and Т22 so that

Аз Ти Тр | Ate

= . 6.1-16

ae Tr Too} | Аль ( )

If the input and output waves are described by the Jones vectors J; and Зо, respectively,

then (6.1-16) may be written in the compact matrix form

Jo =TIi. (6.1-17)

The matrix T, called the Jones matrix, describes the optical system, whereas the
vectors J, and Jz describe the input and output waves.

The structure of the Jones matrix T of a given optical system determines its effect
on the polarization state and intensity of the wave. The following is a compilation of
the Jones matrices of some systems with simple characteristics. Physical devices that
have such characteristics will be discussed subsequently in this chapter.

Linear polarizers. The system represented by the Jones matrix
1
r=|! ° (6.1-18)
0 0 , :
Linear Polarizer
Along « Direction
transforms a wave of components (Ал, Алу) into a wave of components (А1», 0) by
eliminating the y component, thereby yielding a wave polarized along the x direction,
as illustrated in Fig. 6.1-7. The system is a linear polarizer with its transmission axis
pointing in the z direction.

218 — СНАРТЕВ6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
у
x
Figure 6.1-7 The linear polarizer. The lines in
the polarizer represent the field direction that is
permitted to pass.
Linearly polarized
light
Polarizer
Wave retarders. The system represented by the matrix
10
T= f a (6.1-19)
Wave-Retarder
(Fast Axis Along x Direction)
transforms a wave with field components (Aj, Ау) into another with components
(Aix, ТА), thereby delaying the у component by a phase Г while leaving the x
component unchanged. It is therefore called a wave retarder. The x and y axes are
called the fast and slow axes of the retarder, respectively.
The simple application of matrix algebra permits the results illustrated in Fig. 6.1-8
to be understood:
F F
F F
у $” п/2 y $” п
(a) Quarter-wave retarder (b) Half-wave retarder
Figure 6.1-8 Operations of quarter-wave (7/2) and half-wave (т) retarders on several particular
states of polarization are shown in (a) and (6), respectively. Е and $ represent the fast and slow axes
of the retarder, respectively.
= When Г = 7/2, the retarder (called a quarter-wave retarder and described by
the Jones matrix E $)) converts the linearly polarized wave [1] into the left

6.1 POLARIZATION OF LIGHT 219
circularly polarized wave 2; | , and converts the right circularly polarized wave
В into the linearly polarized wave [1].
= When Г = л, the retarder (called a half-wave retarder and described by the
Jones matrix ь 9] converts the linearly polarized wave [1] into the linearly
polarized wave [4] , thereby rotating the plane of polarization by 90°. The half-
wave retarder converts the right circularly polarized wave В into the left circu-
larly polarized wave 2; | .
Polarization rotators. While a wave retarder can transform a wave with one form
of polarization into another, a polarization rotator always maintains the linear polar-
ization of a wave but rotates the plane of polarization by a particular angle. The Jones
matrix
Polarization Rotator
represents a device that converts a linearly polarized wave |e о into another linearly
polarized wave ЕЯ , where 62 = 01 +0. It therefore rotates the plane of polarization
of a linearly polarized wave by an angle 0.
Cascaded Polarization Devices
The action of cascaded optical systems on polarized light may be conveniently deter-
mined by using conventional matrix multiplication formulas. A system characterized
by the Jones matrix T; followed by another characterized by 'Т. are equivalent to
a single system characterized by the product matrix Т = T2T,. The matrix of the
system through which light is first transmitted must stand to the right in the matrix
product since it is the first to affect the input Jones vector.
ee
EXERCISE 6.1-2
Cascaded Wave Retarders. Show that two cascaded quarter-wave retarders with parallel fast
axes are equivalent to a half-wave retarder. What is the result if the fast axes are orthogonal?
НИ
Coordinate Transformation
The elements of the Jones vectors and Jones matrices are dependent on the choice of
the coordinate system. However, if these elements are known in one coordinate system,
they can be determined in another coordinate system by using matrix methods. If J is
the Jones vector in the х-у coordinate system, then in a new coordinate system x’-y’,
with the x’ direction making an angle 6 with the x direction, the Jones vector J’ is
given by
J’=R(9)J, (6.1-21)

220 CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
where R(6) is the coordinate-transformation matrix
У
Ух ,
= xy ;
eo NN x Coordinate
° \ Transformation
This can be verified by relating the components of the electric field in the two coordi-
nate systems.
The Jones matrix T, which represents an optical system, is similarly transformed
into T’, in accordance with the matrix relations
T’ = R(6) TR(-0) (6.1-23)
T = R(-0) T’ R(9), (6.1-24)
where R(—@) is given by (6.1-22) with —6 replacing 9. The matrix R(—8) is the in-
verse of R(@), so that R(—0) R(6) is a unit matrix. Equation (6.1-23) can be obtained
by using the relation Jz = TJ, and the transformation J5 = R(0) Jo = R(@) T Ji.
Since J; = R(-—@) Л, we have J, = R(0) T R(—6) Jj; since J = T’ Ji, (6.1-23)
follows.
ee
EXERCISE 6.1-3
Jones Matrix of a Rotated Half-Wave Retarder. Show that the Jones matrix of a half-wave
retarder whose fast axis makes an angle @ with the x axis is
20 sin 20
T= oe ; (6.1-25)
$120 — cos 26 Half-Wave Retarder
at Angle 9
Derive (6.1-25) using (6.1-19), (6.1-22), and (6.1-24). Demonstrate that if 9 = 22.5°, the output
waves are proportional to the sum and difference of the input waves.
ee
Normal Modes
The normal modes of a polarization system are the states of polarization that are not
changed when the wave is transmitted through the system (see Appendix C). These
states have Jones vectors satisfying
TJ =p, (6.1-26)
where jz is constant. The normal modes are therefore the eigenvectors of the Jones
matrix T, and the values of 44 are the corresponding eigenvalues. Since the matrix
T is of size 2 x 2 there are only two independent normal modes, TJ; = и1 J, and
TJ. = pode. If the matrix T is a Hermitian, 1.е., if Т12 = Ту, the normal modes are
orthogonal: (1, J2) = 0. The normal modes are usually used as an expansion basis, so
that an arbitrary input wave J may be expanded as a superposition of normal modes:
J = о 1 + a2gJ2. The response of the system may then be easily evaluated since
TJ = Т(а + a2J2) = ТЗ + agTJ2 = apd + agpe2J2 (see Appendix С).

6.2 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION 221
ee
EXERCISE 6.1-4
Normal Modes of Simple Polarization Systems.

(a) Show that the normal modes of the linear polarizer are linearly polarized waves.

(b) Show that the normal modes of the wave retarder are linearly polarized waves.

(c) Show that the normal modes of the polarization rotator are right and left circularly polarized
waves.

What are the eigenvalues of the systems described above?
И
6.2 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
In this section we examine the reflection and refraction of a monochromatic plane wave
of arbitrary polarization incident at a planar boundary between two dielectric media.
The media are assumed to be linear, homogeneous, and isotropic with impedances 771
and 772, and refractive indices пл and ng. The incident, refracted, and reflected waves

are labeled with the subscripts 1, 2, and 3, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 6.2-1.

As shown in Sec. 2.4A, the wavefronts of these waves are matched at the boundary if
the angles of reflection and incidence are equal, 93 = 91, and if the angles of refraction
and incidence satisfy Snell’s law,

пл sin 6, = ng sin 92. (6.2-1)

To relate the amplitudes and polarizations of the three waves, we associate with
each wave an т—у coordinate system in a plane normal to the direction of propagation
(Fig. 6.2-1). The electric-field envelopes of these waves are described by the Jones
vectors

Ay А? Аз
Л = ы Т = * J3= |. 6.2-2
1 | А ly ’ 2 A 2y ’ 3 Азу ( )
We proceed to determine the relations between Jz and J; and between J3 and 1.
These relations are written in the form of matrices Jo = tJ, and J3 = rJ,, where t
and r are 2 x 2 Jones matrices describing the transmission and reflection of the wave,
respectively.

The elements of the transmission and reflection matrices may be determined by
imposing the boundary conditions required by electromagnetic theory, namely the
continuity at the boundary of the tangential components of Е and H and the normal
components of D and B. The electric field associated with each wave is orthogonal to
the magnetic field; the ratio of their envelopes is the characteristic impedance, which
is 71 for the incident and reflected waves and 12 for the transmitted wave. The result
is a set of equations that are solved to obtain relations between the components of the
electric fields of the three waves.

The algebra involved is reduced substantially if we observe that the two normal
modes for this system are linearly polarized waves with polarizations along the x and y
directions. This may be proved if we show that an incident, a reflected, and a refracted
wave with their electric-field vectors pointing in the x direction are self-consistent
with the boundary conditions, and similarly for three waves linearly polarized in the y
direction. This is indeed the case. The x and у polarized waves are therefore uncoupled.

222  CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
ry о

№
ce

Зе

9>

Plane of
JS incidence
Figure 6.2-1 Reflection and refraction at the boundary between two dielectric media.

The x-polarized mode is called the transverse electric (TE) polarization or the
orthogonal polarization, since the electric fields are orthogonal to the plane of inci-
dence. The y-polarized mode is called the transverse magnetic (TM) polarization
since the magnetic field is orthogonal to the plane of incidence, or the parallel polari-
zation since the electric fields are parallel to the plane of incidence. The orthogonal and
parallel polarizations are also called the s (for the German senkrecht, meaning “per-
pendicular”) and р (for “parallel”) polarizations, respectively. The у axes in Fig. 6.2-1
are arbitrarily defined such that their components parallel to the boundary between the
dielectrics all point in the same direction.

The independence of the x and y polarizations implies that the Jones matrices t and
r are diagonal,

| 0 _ |т 0

$ = Ё ы ; r= Ё ry (6.2-3)
so that

Foy = te Fix, Poy = ty Fy (6.2-4)

Ege = TeE 12, Ezy = ту лу. (6.2-5)
The coefficients +, and t, are the complex amplitude transmittances for the TE and
TM polarizations, respectively; т, and т, are the analogous complex amplitude re-
flectances.

Applying the boundary conditions (i.e., equating the tangential components of the
electric fields and the tangential components of the magnetic fields at both sides of the
boundary) in each of the TE and TM cases, we obtain the following expressions for the
complex-amplitude reflectances and transmittances:

sec 95 — 1 sec 9
ty = Bee ee NSC т, (6.2-6)
772 sec 95 + 71 sec 91 TE Polarization
cos 62 — n, cos 6 cos 9
7, = pO и) =. (6.2-7)
72 COS A + т COS 1 cos 42 TM Polarization
Reflection & Transmission

The characteristic impedance 7 = \/й/е is complex if е and/or 4 are complex, as
is the case for lossy or conductive media. For nonlossy, nonmagnetic, dielectric media,
7 = n/n is real, where 7, = \/{o/€> and n is the refractive index. In this case,

6.2 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION 223
the reflection and transmission coefficients in (6.2-6) and (6.2-7) yield the Fresnel
equations:

пл Cos 01 — Nz COS 05
та, tr = 14+, (6.2-8)
пл cos 01 + ng cos 65 TE Polarization
пл sec 91 — ng sec 95 cos 6
мо, ty = (1 +1,) и. (6.2-9)
пл sec 91 + nz sec 95 cos 65 TM Polarization
Fresnel Equations
Given пл, 72, and 91, the reflection coefficients can be determined from the Fresnel
equations by first determining 95 using Snell’s law, (6.2-1), from which
cos 02 = МТ — sin? 65 = \/1-— (пл /п2)? sin? 01. (6.2-10)
Since the quantities under the square-root signs in (6.2-10) can be negative, the re-
flection and transmission coefficients are in general complex. The magnitudes |r,,| and
|r,|, and the phase shifts y, = arg{r,} and фу = arg{r,}, are plotted in Figs. 6.2-2
to 6.2-5 for the two polarizations, as functions of the angle of incidence 01. Plots are
provided for external reflection (пл < nz) as well as for internal reflection (пл > nz).
TE Polarization
The dependence of the reflection coefficient r, on 91 for the TE-polarized wave is
given by (6.2-8):
External reflection (701 < nz). The reflection coefficient т. is always real and nega-
tive, corresponding to a phase shift ф., = т. The magnitude |т,| = (nz—n1)/(n1+n2)
at 01 = 0 (normal incidence) and increases to unity at 6; = 90° (grazing incidence),
as shown in Fig. 6.2-2.
1
x TTTTTLLL
4 LY Lt | | | | | Ty
Be Ir,| pit i | er
ZA Е
p_Li tT | О О О
.
Figure 6.2-2 Magnitude and phase of the re- i
flection coefficient as a function of the angle
of incidence for external reflection of the TE- 0
polarized wave (n2/n, = 1.5). 0 9, 90°
Internal reflection (п: > nz). For small 91 the reflection coefficient is real and
positive. Its magnitude is (пл — n2)/(n1 + п2) when 01 = 0°, and increases grad-
ually to a value of unity, which is attained when 6; equals the critical angle 9. =
sin! (ng /n1). For 0; > 0., the magnitude of r, remains at unity, which corresponds
to total internal reflection. This may be shown by using (6.2-10) to write’ cos 0) =
—\/1 — sin? 6,/sin? 0. = —j \/sin? 01 / sin? 6, — 1, and substituting into (6.2-8). To-
tal internal reflection is accompanied by a phase shift y, = arg{r,} given by
* The choice of the minus sign for the square root is consistent with the derivation that leads to the Fresnel
equation.

224 — СНАРТЕВ6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
26
tan? = |“ * 1 (6.2-11)
2 cos’ 9. TE-Reflection
Phase Shift
The phase shift ~, increases from 0 at 6; = 6, to m at 6; = 90°, as illustrated in
Fig. 6.2-3. This phase plays an important role in dielectric waveguides (see Sec. 9.2).
An evanescent wave is created in the vicinity of the boundary when total internal
reflection occurs.
1
a
zB L | | | A
р lt fT о
| И
vy o LL | О О
п
шир и
Figure 6.2-3 Magnitude and phase of the re- * МЕР
flection coefficient аз a function of the angle Lt | | te
of incidence for internal reflection of the TE- gp Ll | В
polarized wave (пл /п2 = 1.5). 0 9 9, 90
TM Polarization
Similarly, the dependence of the reflection coefficient т, on 6, for the TM-polarized
wave is provided by (6.2-9):
External reflection (nj < 72). The reflection coefficient т, is always real, as shown
in Fig. 6.2-4. It assumes a negative value of (п1 — n2)/(n1 + п2) at 0: = 0 (normal
incidence). Its magnitude then decreases until it vanishes when 1 sec 6; = nz sec 65,
at an angle 91 = 0p, known as the Brewster angle:
дв = tan! (n2/n1) (6.2-12)
Brewster Angle
(see Prob. 6.2-4 for other properties of the Brewster angle). For 0; > Op, Ty reverses
sign (фу goes from 7 to 0) and its magnitude gradually increases until it approaches
unity at 91 = 90°. The absence of reflection of the TM wave at the Brewster angle is
useful for making polarizers (see Sec. 6.6).
1
Pi} | tt tt |
, es
У Е О В И
т РРЕЕЕЕРИЫ
pL | Ч ИИ
п
ЕЕ
РИ
, О О В
Figure 6.2-4 Magnitude and phase of the re- Ш 1
flection coefficient as a function of the angle
of incidence for external reflection of the TM- fA LETT A |
polarized wave (n2/n, = 1.5). B 0,

6.2 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION 225
Internal reflection (пл > nz). At 6, = 0°, the reflection coefficient т, is positive
and has magnitude (пл — nz)/(n1 + nz), as illustrated in Fig. 6.2-5. As 6; increases,
the magnitude decreases until it vanishes at the Brewster angle 0g = tan~!(n2/n1).
As 6; increases beyond дв, т, becomes negative and its magnitude increases until it
reaches unity at the critical angle 6%. For 0; > 0. the wave undergoes total internal
reflection accompanied by a phase shift фу = arg{r,} given by
—1 cos? 0
tan 2 = —_, |e 4, (6.2-13)
2 sin’. || cos 01 TM-Reflection
Phase Shift
At normal incidence, evidently, the reflection coefficient is т = (nj —n2)/(n1+Nn2),
whether the reflection is TE or TM, or external or internal.
1
| | | | Py
Ba || | | ee TT
О О р О
АР
У Е О
ИВ
И
oot Se
Py
Figure 6.2-5 Magnitude and phase of the re- ПХ ||.
flection coefficient as a function of the angle ГП <=
of incidence for internal reflection of the TM- 0 вы
. _ 0 Op 0. 6 90
polarized wave (пл /п> = 1.5). 1
[|
EXERCISE 6.2-1
Brewster Windows. At what angle is а TM-polarized beam of light transmitted through a glass
plate of refractive index n = 1.5 placed in air (n = 1) without suffering reflection losses at either
surface? Such plates, known as Brewster windows (Fig. 6.2-6), are used in lasers, as described in
Sec. 16.2D.
Oz 22
Figure 6.2-6 The Brewster window transmits
TM-polarized light with no reflection loss.
ТТТ —“C™CSCSC‘(‘(‘(CSCds

226 — СНАРТЕВ6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
Power Reflectance and Transmittance
The reflection and transmission coefficients r and t represent ratios of complex ampli-
tudes. The power reflectance ® and power transmittance J are defined as the ratios of
power flow (along a direction normal to the boundary) of the reflected and transmitted
waves to that of the incident wave. Because the reflected and incident waves propagate
in the same medium and make the same angle with the normal to the surface, it follows
that
R= |r]. (6.2-14)
For both TE and TM polarizations, and for both external and internal reflection, the
power reflectance at normal incidence is therefore
ny —1n2\?
R= (m=) ; (6.2-15)
пл + Ng Power Reflectance
at Normal Incidence
At the boundary between glass (n = 1.5) and air (n = 1), for example, R = 0.04,
so that 4% of the light is reflected at normal incidence. At the boundary between GaAs
(п = 3.6) and air (п = 1), R == 0.32, so that 32% of the light is reflected at normal
incidence. However, at oblique angles the reflectance can be much greater or much
smaller than 32%, as illustrated in Fig. 6.2-7.
n=1 | n=3.6 Ы В ПО ПО ПИ ОИ ПО И ОИ
О ПО | | | | ОО | | PY |
g [| | ty tt A
Е р ref}
Bo5,_|_| | | [er | J
9 |
Е pf tim
О О О О ПО чи О ПИ ИИ
ogi tL tT | tt) |
0 20° 40° 60° 80° 09
Figure 6.2-7 Power reflectance of TE- and TM-polarization plane waves at фе boundary between
air (n = 1) and GaAs (n = 3.6), as a function of the angle of incidence 0.
The power transmittance J is determined by invoking the conservation of power, so
that in the absence of absorption loss the transmittance is simply
T=1-8. (6.2-16)
It is important to note, however, that J is generally not equal to |t|? since the power
travels at different angles and with different impedances in the two media. For a wave
traveling at an angle 9 in a medium of refractive index п, the power flow in the direction
normal to the boundary is (|€|?/27) cos 6 = (|E|?/2n,) n cos 0. It follows that
Nz COS 02 9
=. (6.2-17)
пл COs 91

6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 227
Reflectance from a plate. The power reflectance at normal incidence from a plate
with two surfaces is described by R(1 + J?) since the power reflected from the far
surface involves a double transmission through the near surface. For a glass plate
in air, the overall reflectance is R(1 + J”) = 0.04[1 + (0.96)?] = 0.077, so that
about 7.7% of the incident light power is reflected. However, this calculation does
not include interference effects, which are washed out when the light is incoherent
(see Sec.12.2), nor does it account for multiple reflections inside the plate. Optical
transmission and reflectance from multiple boundaries in layered media are described
in detail in Sec. 7.1.
6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA
A dielectric medium is said to be anisotropic if its macroscopic optical properties
depend on direction. The macroscopic properties of a material are, of course, ultimately
governed by its microscopic properties: the shape and orientation of the individual
molecules and the organization of their centers in space. Optical materials have dif-
ferent kinds of positional and orientational types of order, which may be described as
follows (see Fig. 6.3-1):
ОИС о СЕТЕ
Pe Aniisotropic о
VU, 172777
227 LLLP
Lh РР И
alg АЕ)
А =! п = 27
<, NS coo
и | й
и S ВЕНЕ
7, `` Т We LTT TTY
f= (ttn POAT
Gas, liquid, amorphous solid Polycrystalline Crystalline Liquid crystal
Figure 6.3-1 Positional and orientational order in different types of materials.
= If the molecules are located at totally random positions in space, and are them-
selves isotropic or oriented along random directions, the medium is isotropic.
Gases, liquids, and amorphous solids follow this prescription.
= If the structure takes the form of disjointed crystalline grains that are randomly
oriented with respect to each other, the material is said to be polycrystalline.
The individual grains are, in general, anisotropic, but their averaged macroscopic
behavior is isotropic.
= If the molecules are organized in space according to a regular periodic pattern and
they are oriented in the same direction, as in crystals, the medium is, in general,
anisotropic.
= If the molecules are anisotropic and their orientations are not totally random, the
medium is anisotropic, even if their positions are totally random. This is the case
for liquid crystals, which have orientational order but lack complete positional
order.

228 — СНАРТЕВ6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
A. Refractive Indices
Permittivity Tensor
In a linear anisotropic dielectric medium (a crystal, for example), each component
of the electric flux density D is a linear combination of the three components of the
electric field,
D; =У iE. (6.3-1)
J
The indices 7, 7 = 1, 2, 3 refer to the x, у, and z components, respectively, as described
in Sec. 5.2B. The dielectric properties of the medium are therefore characterized by a
3 x 3 array of nine coefficients, {¢;;}, that form the electric permittivity tensor Е,
which is a tensor of second rank. The material equation (6.3-1) is usually written in
the symbolic form
D =ЕЕ. (6.3-2)
For most dielectric media, the electric permittivity tensor is symmetric, 1.е., €;; =
Ей. This means that the relation between the vectors D and E is reciprocal, i.e., their
ratio remains the same if their directions are exchanged. This symmetry is obeyed
for dielectric nonmagnetic materials that do not exhibit optical activity, and in the
absence of an external magnetic field (Sec. 6.4). With this symmetry, the medium is
characterized by only six independent numbers in an arbitrary coordinate system. For
crystals of certain symmetries, even fewer coefficients suffice since some vanish and
some are related.
Geometrical Representation of Vectors and Tensors
A vector, such as the electric field E, for example, describes a physical variable
with magnitude and direction. It is represented geometrically by an arrow pointing in
that particular direction, whose length is proportional to the magnitude of the vector
[Fig. 6.3-2(a)]. A vector, which is a tensor of first rank, is represented numerically
by three numbers: its projections on the three axes of a particular coordinate system.
Though these components depend on the choice of the coordinate system, the magni-
tude and direction of the vector in physical space are independent of the choice of the
coordinate system. A scalar, which is described by a single number, is a tensor of zero
rank.
/ a Figure 6.3-2 Geometrical representation of:
SS (a) a vector; (b) a symmetric second-rank tensor.
(а) (6)
A second-rank tensor is a rule that relates two vectors. In a given coordinate system,
it is represented numerically by nine numbers. Changing the coordinate system yields

6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 229
a different set of nine numbers, but the physical nature of the rule is unchanged. A
useful geometrical representation [Fig. 6.3-2(b)] of a symmetric second-rank tensor
(the permittivity tensor e, for example), is a quadratic surface (an ellipsoid) defined by
Soe vivj = 1, (6.3-3)
aj
which is known as the quadric representation. This surface is invariant to the choice
of the coordinate system; if the coordinate system is rotated, both x; and €;; are altered
but the ellipsoid remains intact in physical space. The ellipsoid has six degrees of
freedom and carries all information about the symmetric second-rank tensor. In the
principal coordinate system, €;; is diagonal and the ellipsoid assumes a particularly
simple form:
2 2 2
е1 21 + €9%5 + €3%3 = 1. (6.3-4)
Its principal axes are those of the tensor, and its axes have half-lengths 1/,/e; , 1/,/e2,
and 1 / 4/€3.
Principal Axes and Principal Refractive Indices
The elements of the permittivity tensor depend on how the coordinate system is chosen
relative to the crystal structure. However, a coordinate system can always be found for
which the off-diagonal elements of €;; vanish, so that
D, = а 1, D2 = €2F2, D3 = 6363, (6.3-5)
where €; = €11, €2 = 622, and €3 = €33. According to (6.3-1), Е and D are parallel
along these particular directions so that if, for example, Е points in the x direction,
then so too must D. This coordinate system defines the principal axes and principal
planes of the crystal. Throughout the remainder of this chapter, the coordinate system
т, 9, 2, which is equivalently denoted x1, то, x3, is assumed to lie along the principal
axes of the crystal. This choice simplifies all analyses without loss of generality. The
permittivities ет, €2, and €3 correspond to refractive indices
пл = Ve1/€ nz = v/€2/€o, ng = /€3/€o, (6.3-6)
respectively, where €, is the permittivity of free space; these are known as the principal
refractive indices.
Biaxial, Uniaxial, and Isotropic Crystals
Crystals in which the three principal refractive indices are different are termed biaxial.
For crystals with certain symmetries, namely a single axis of threefold, fourfold, or
sixfold symmetry, two of the refractive indices are equal (nj = 72) and the crystal
is called uniaxial. In this case, the indices are usually denoted ny = ng = no and
3 = Пе, which are known as the ordinary and extraordinary indices, respectively,
for reasons that will become clear shortly. The crystal is said to be positive uniaxial if
Ne > По, and negative uniaxial if пе < по. The z axis of a uniaxial crystal is called
the optic axis. In certain crystals with even greater symmetry (those with cubic unit
cells, for example), all three indices are equal and the medium is optically isotropic.

230 — СНАРТЕВ6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
Impermeability Tensor
The relation D = ЕЕ can be inverted and written in the form Е = e~!D, where e7!
is the inverse of the tensor Е. It is also useful to define the electric impermeability
tensor n = вое" (not to be confused with the impedance of the medium 7), so that
© = nD. Since е is symmetric, so too is n. Both tensors, е and п, share the same
principal axes. In the principal coordinate system, п is diagonal with principal values
€o/€1 = 1/12, €o/€g = 1/n3, and €,/€3 = 1/п3. Either tensor, е or n, fully describes
the optical properties of the crystal.
Index Ellipsoid
The index ellipsoid (also called the optical indicatrix) is the quadric representation
of the electric impermeability tensor | = €,e7!:
У‘пити; = i, 7 =1,2,3. (6.3-7)
ay
If the principal axes were to be used as the coordinate system, we would obtain
2 2 2
ЕТ, (6.3-8)
np 7 Ng Index Ellipsoid
with principal values 1/n7, 1/n3, and 1/n3, and axes of half-lengths пт, n2, and n3.
The optical properties of the crystal (the directions of the principal axes and the
values of the principal refractive indices) are therefore completely described by the
index ellipsoid (Fig. 6.3-3). For a uniaxial crystal, the index ellipsoid reduces to an
ellipsoid of revolution; for an isotropic medium it becomes a sphere.
хз
n3
a Figure 6.3-3 The index ellipsoid. The coor-
dinates (4, 22,23) are the principal axes while
ДД m x2 (пл, 2,3) are the principal refractive indices of
the crystal.
x
B. Propagation Along a Principal Axis
The rules that govern the propagation of light in crystals under general conditions are
rather complex. However, they become relatively simple if the light is a plane wave
traveling along one of the principal axes of the crystal. We begin with this case.
Normal Modes
Let x—y-z be a coordinate system that coincides with the principal axes of a crystal.
A plane wave traveling in the z direction and linearly polarized along the x direction
[Fig. 6.3-4(a)] travels with phase velocity c,/n; (wavenumber К = п1Ко) without
changing its polarization. The reason for this is that the electric field has only one

6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA — 231
component, F pointed along the x direction, so that D is also in the x direction with
Dy = €, Ел; the wave equation derived from Maxwell’s equations therefore provides a
velocity of light given by 1/\/йоЕт = c./n1. Similarly, a plane wave traveling in the =
direction and linearly polarized along the у direction [Fig. 6.3-4(6)] travels with phase
velocity со /п2, thereby experiencing a refractive index nz. Thus, the normal modes for
propagation in the z direction are linearly polarized waves in the x and y directions.
These waves are said to be normal modes because their velocities and polarizations
are maintained as they propagate (see Appendix C). Other cases in which the wave
propagates along one of the principal axes and is linearly polarized along another are
treated similarly [Fig. 6.3-4(c)].

< < <
x x x
(a) (b) (с)
Figure 6.3-4 A wave traveling along а principal axis and polarized along another principal axis
has phase velocity со/пл, Co/m2, ог Co/n3, when the electric-field vector points in the x, у, or z
directions, respectively. (a) К = niko; (b) k = nok; (С) К = пзКо.
Polarization Along an Arbitrary Direction
We now consider a wave traveling along one principal axis (the z axis, for example)
that is linearly polarized along an arbitrary direction in the х—у plane. This case is
addressed by analyzing the wave as a sum of the normal modes, namely the linearly
polarized waves in the т and у directions. These two components travel with different
phase velocities, c,/n1 and со /п2, respectively. They therefore undergo different phase
shifts, pr = nikod and фу = nokod, respectively, after propagating a distance 4.
Their phase retardation is thus ф = фу — Yr = (nz — n1)kod. Recombination of
the two components yields an elliptically polarized wave, as explained in Sec. 6.1 and
illustrated in Fig. 6.3-5. Such a crystal can therefore serve as a wave retarder, a device
in which two orthogonal polarizations travel at different phase velocities so that one is
retarded with respect to the other (see Fig. 6.1-8).
У x У x У x
Abby. МИ. ALAM
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 6.3-5 A linearly polarized wave at 45° in the z = 0 plane (a) is analyzed as a superposition
of two linearly polarized components in the x and y directions (normal modes), which travel at
velocities c,/n, and со/п2 [(b) and (с), respectively]. As a result of phase retardation, the wave is
converted from plane polarization to elliptical polarization (a). It is therefore clear that the initial
linearly polarized wave is not a normal mode of the system.

232 CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
C. Propagation in an Arbitrary Direction
We now consider the general case of a plane wave traveling in an anisotropic crystal in
an arbitrary direction defined by the unit vector и. We demonstrate that the two normal
modes are linearly polarized waves. The refractive indices п, and np, and the directions
of polarization of these modes, may be determined by use of a procedure based on the
index ellipsoid:
Index-Ellipsoid Construction for Determining Normal Modes
Figure 6.3-6 illustrates a geometrical construction for determining the polari-
zations and refractive indices n and nz of the normal modes of a wave traveling
in the direction of the unit vector U in an anisotropic material characterized by the
index ellipsoid:
+5 =1.
Index n3 ny ns 73
еШрзе
a
n а
Dal > —
yy Figure 6.3-6 Determination of the normal
> Dp | n2 x2 modes from the index ellipsoid.
м
Index
ellipsoid
= Draw a plane passing through the origin of the index ellipsoid, normal to U.
The intersection of the plane with the ellipsoid is an ellipse called the index
ellipse.
= The half-lengths of the major and minor axes of the index ellipse are the
refractive indices п, and nz of the two normal modes.
= The directions of the major and minor axes of the index ellipse are the
directions of the vectors D, and Dy, for the normal modes. These directions
are orthogonal.
= The vectors E, and Ey, may be determined from D, and Dy with the help of
(6.3-5).
С Proof of the Index-Ellipsoid Construction for Determining the Normal Modes. To determine
the normal modes (see Sec. 6.1B) for a plane wave traveling in the direction 0, we cast Maxwell’s
equations (5.3-2)—(5.3-5), and the material equation D = eE given in (6.3-2), as an eigenvalue
problem. Since all fields are assumed to vary with the position г as exp(—jk - г), where К = ku,
Maxwell’s equations (5.4-3) and (5.4-4) reduce to
kxH=-wD (6.3-9)
kx E=wp,H (6.3-10)

6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 233
Substituting (6.3-10) into (6.3-9) leads to
k x (k x E) = —w? yD. (6.3-11)
Using Е = е Ю, we obtain
k x (Кхе О) = и? и.о. (6.3-12)
This is an eigenvalue equation that D must satisfy. Working with D is convenient since we know that
it lies in a plane normal to the wave direction U.
We now simplify (6.3-12) by using n = «,e€7', К = Ка, п = k/ko, and k? = м? poe, to obtain
AA 1
—@х (uxnD)=—D. (6.3-13)
п
The operation —U x (ий x nD) may be interpreted as a projection of the vector ПО onto a plane
normal to и. We may therefore rewrite (6.3-13) in the form
1
Рио = — О, (6.3-14)
п
where P., is an operator representing projection. Equation (6.3-14) is an eigenvalue equation for the
operator P,,1), with eigenvalue 1/n? and eigenvector О. The two eigenvalues, 1/n? and 1/n?, and
two corresponding eigenvectors, D, and Оь, which are orthogonal, represent the two normal modes.
The eigenvalue problem (6.3-14) has a simple geometrical interpretation. The tensor 1] is repre-
sented geometrically by its quadric representation, the index ellipsoid. The operator P.,,n represents
projection onto a plane normal to и. Solving the eigenvalue problem in (6.3-14) is thus equivalent to
finding the principal axes of the ellipse formed by the intersection of the plane normal to U with the
index ellipsoid. This is precisely the construction set forth in Fig. 6.3-6 for determining the normal
modes. a
Special Case: Uniaxial Crystals
In uniaxial crystals (ny = П2 = По and пз = пе) the index ellipsoid of Fig. 6.3-6 is an
ellipsoid of revolution. For a wave whose direction of travel u forms an angle 6 with
the optic axis, the index ellipse has half-lengths n, and n(@), where п(0) is determined
from the index-ellipsoid equation by making the substitutions 71 = n(@) cos 0, x2 = 0,
and x3 = —n(@) sin 0. The result is
1 cos?@ — sin? 6
72(0) =a tT (6.3-15)
n?(0) По Пе Refractive Index
of Extraordinary Wave
so that the normal modes have refractive indices пь = по and п. = п(0). The first
mode, called the ordinary wave, has a refractive index по regardless of @. In accord-
ance with the ellipse shown in Fig. 6.3-7, the second mode, called the extraordinary
wave, has a refractive index n(0) that varies from п when 9 = 0°, ю п. when 9 = 90°.
The vector D of the ordinary wave is normal to the plane defined by the optic axis (z
axis) and the direction of wave propagation k, and the vectors E and D are parallel.
The extraordinary wave, on the other hand, has a vector D that is normal to k and lies
in the А plane, and Е is not parallel to О, as shown in Fig. 6.3-7.

234 — СНАРТЕВ6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
ow!
OF | a |
и | D |
и 7 eX |p
| |
\ р п, ED; iH
| Ca — a
ний ee о wave е wave
Figure 6.3-7 Variation of the refractive index п(0) of the extraordinary wave with 0 (the angle
between the direction of propagation and the optic axis) in a uniaxial crystal, and directions of the
electromagnetic fields of the ordinary (0) and extraordinary (е) waves. The circle with a dot at the
center located at the origin signifies that the direction of the vector is out of the plane of the paper,
toward the reader.
D. Dispersion Relation, Rays, Wavefronts, and Energy Transport
We now examine other properties of waves in anisotropic media including the disper-
sion relation (the relation between w and k).

The optical wave is characterized by the wavevector k, the field vectors E, D, H,
and B, and the complex Poynting vector S = ТЕ x Н* (direction of power flow).
These vectors are related by (6.3-9) and (6.3-10). It follows from (6.3-9) that D is
normal to both k and H. Equation (6.3-10) similarly indicates that H is normal to both
k and E. These geometrical conditions are illustrated in Fig. 6.3-8, which also shows
the complex Poynting vector S, which is orthogonal to both Е and Н. Thus, О, Е, К,
and 5 lie in one plane to which H and В are normal. In this plane О | Капа 1 E;
but D is not necessarily parallel to E, and S is not necessarily parallel to k.

Figure 6.3-8 The vectors О, Е, К, and S
all lie in a single plane, to which H and B
are normal. Also D 1 k and Е 1 S. The
po wavefronts are orthogonal to k.
Dispersion Relation: The k Surface
Using the relation D = eF in (6.3-11), we obtain
k x (k x E) + w,€E = 0. (6.3-16)
This vector equation, which E must satisfy, translates to three linear homogeneous
equations for the components Ё1, E2, and E3 along the principal axes, written in the
matrix form
nik? — КЗ — КЗ КК К Аз Fy 0
koky nk? — ki — k3 ККЗ Eo = 10 5 (6.3-17)
k3ky k3ko nk? — ki — К EB 0
where (ki, К2, Кз) are the components of К, kj = w/co, and (пл, п2,пз) are the
principal refractive indices given by (6.3-6). A nontrivial solution to these equations
obtains when the determinant of the matrix is set to zero, which yields

6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 235
k?
j _

> Pome! ео 6319
123 jo Dispersion Relation
k Surface
where К? = А? + k3 + k} and К, = w/co. This relation is known as the dispersion
relation. It is the equation of a surface w = w(ky, k2, k3) in the Ку, К, Кз space, known

as the normal surface or the k surface.

The k surface is a centrosymmetric surface comprising two sheets, each correspond-
ing to a solution (a normal mode). It can be shown that the k surface intersects each
of the principal planes in an ellipse and a circle, as illustrated in Fig. 6.3-9. For biaxial
crystals (ny < п2 < ng), the two sheets meet at four points, defining two optic axes.
In the uniaxial case (ny = 72 = No, N3 = Пе), the two sheets become a sphere and an
ellipsoid of revolution that meet at only two points, thereby defining a single optic axis
(the z axis). In the isotropic case (пл = ng = ng = п), the two sheets degenerate into
a single sphere.

АК А/К КК,
о Ny 22
Ge фм: 58 n
1 `` 71 Nn Пе Ш
a halk, | io halk, К,
Пз По К/К,
К/К k/k,
(a) Biaxial (b) Uniaxial (c) Isotropic
Figure 6.3-9 One octant of the К surface for (a) a biaxial crystal (пл < nz < 3); (b) a uniaxial
crystal (ny = nz = По, N3 = Пе); and (с) an isotropic crystal (пу = ng = n3 = п).
Determining Properties of the Normal Modes from the k Surface
Much like the index ellipsoid, the k surface can be used to determine the normal modes
for waves propagating in any prescribed direction, but it also provides physical insight
into a collection of other properties of these modes, as considered below:
Refractive indices. The intersection of the prescribed direction @ = (uj, U2, из)
of the wave with the k surface is a point at a distance from the origin equal to the
wavenumber К = nw/c,, from which the refractive index п, and the corresponding
phase velocity c = w/k may be determined. In fact, associated with each direction are
two intersections corresponding to two wavenumbers and two refractive indices for the
two normal modes. Substituting (Ал, k2,k3) = (uik, и2К, ugk) into (6.3-18) yields
j=1,2,3 jo
This is a fourth-order equation in К (or second order in k?). It has four solutions, +k,
and +k», of which only the two positive values are meaningful, since the negative
values represent a reversed direction of propagation. The problem is therefore solved:
the wavenumbers of the normal modes are k, and ky and the refractive indices are
Па = ka/ko and Ny = ky/Ko.

236 — CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
Polarization. To find the directions of polarization of the two normal modes, we
determine the components (k1, k2,k3) = (kuz, Киз, Киз) and the elements of the
matrix in (6.3-17) for each of the two wavenumbers К = k, and К = ky. We then
solve two of the three equations in (6.3-17) to establish the ratios E/E3 and Е>/Ез,
from which we find the directions of the corresponding fields E, and Ey. Note that Eq
and Еь for the two modes are not necessarily orthogonal, whereas О. and О, are.
Group velocity. The group velocity may also be determined from the k surface. In
analogy with the group velocity v = dw/dk that governs the propagation of light pulses
(wavepackets), as discussed in Sec. 5.7, the group velocity for rays (localized beams
or spatial wavepackets) is the vector у = V;,w(k), the gradient of w with respect to К.
Since the К surface is the surface w(k1, Ко, Кз) = constant, v must be normal to the К
surface. Thus, rays travel along directions normal to the k surface. The wavefronts are
perpendicular to the wavevector К since the phase of the wave is К - г. The wavefront
normals are therefore parallel to the wavevector k.
Energy transport. The complex Poynting vector S = 3E х Н* is also normal to
the k surface. This can be demonstrated by choosing a value for w and considering two
vectors k and k + Ak that lie on the k surface. Taking the differentials of (6.3-9) and
(6.3-10), and using certain vector identities, shows that Ak - 5 = 0, so that S is normal
to the k surface. Consequently, S is also parallel to the group velocity vector v.
Optical rays. If the К surface is a sphere, as it is for isotropic media, the vectors К, S,
and v are all parallel, indicating that rays are parallel to the wavevector k and energy
flows in the same direction, as illustrated in Fig. 6.3-10(а). On the other hand, if the
К surface is not normal to the wavevector К, as illustrated in Fig. 6.3-10(b), the rays
and the direction of energy transport are not orthogonal to the wavefronts. Rays then
have the “extraordinary” property of traveling at an oblique angle to their wavefronts
[Fig. 6.3-10(b)].
Ray
x Ray wren
k surface р
\ $ Wavefronts k surface $ У
k Z
/ a
ae |
(a) Ordinary (6) Extraordinary
Figure 6.3-10 Rays and wavefronts for (a) a spherical К surface, and (6) a nonspherical К surface.
Special Case: Uniaxial Crystals
In uniaxial crystals (ny = no = По and пз = пе), the equation of the К surface
w = в (Кл, Ко, k3) simplifies to
ke tke kg
(К? — n?k?) (A+ + = - 2] =0. (6.3-20)
е о
This equation has two solutions: a sphere, corresponding to the leftmost factor vanish-
ing:
К = nok, (6.3-21)

6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 237
and an ellipsoid of revolution, corresponding to the rightmost factor vanishing:
ki tks | kg
t+ Ski. (6.3-22)
Ne По
Because of symmetry about the 2 axis (optic axis), there is по loss of generality in
assuming that the vector k lies in the y—z plane. Its direction is then characterized by
the angle @ it makes with the optic axis. It is thus convenient to draw the k-surfaces
only in the y—z plane, as a circle and an ellipse, as shown in Fig. 6.3-11.
К/К,
По
№. =
ra Figure 6.3-11 Intersection of the k
surfaces with the y—z plane for a positive
Me klk “aX
Iho uniaxial crystal (ne > По).

Given the direction U of the vector К, the wavenumber К is determined by finding
the intersection with the k surfaces. The two solutions define the two normal modes,
the ordinary and extraordinary waves. The ordinary wave has wavenumber А = nok
regardless of the direction of а, whereas the extraordinary wave has wavenumber
n(0)ko, where п(0) is given by (6.3-15), thereby confirming earlier results obtained
from the index-ellipsoid geometrical construction. The directions of the rays, wave-
fronts, energy flow, and field vectors E and D for the ordinary and extraordinary waves
in a uniaxial crystal are illustrated in Fig. 6.3-12.

$ 5
Е, О р
H Н k
No No $
>i, [>
(a) Ordinary (b) Extraordinary
Figure 6.3-12 The normal modes for a plane wave traveling in a direction k that makes an angle
9 with the optic axis z of a uniaxial crystal are: (a) An ordinary wave of refractive index по polarized
in a direction normal to the k—z plane. (b) An extraordinary wave of refractive index n(0) [given by
(6.3-15)] polarized in the k—z plane along a direction tangential to the ellipse (the К surface) at the
point of its intersection with k. This wave is “extraordinary” in the following ways: D is not parallel
to Е but both lie in the k—z plane, and $ is not parallel to К so that power does not flow along the
direction of k; the rays are therefore not normal to the wavefronts so that the wave travels “sideways.”

238  CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
E. Double Refraction
Refraction of Plane Waves
We now examine the refraction of a plane wave at the boundary between an isotropic
medium (say ат, п = 1) and an anisotropic medium (a crystal). The key principle
that governs the refraction of waves for this configuration is that the wavefronts of the
incident and refracted waves must be matched at the boundary. Because the anisotropic
medium supports two modes with distinctly different phase velocities, and therefore
different indices of refraction, an incident wave gives rise to two refracted waves
with different directions and different polarizations. The effect is known as double
refraction or birefringence.
The phase-matching condition requires that Snell’s law be obeyed, 1.е.,
ko sind, = Кэш 9, (6.3-23)
where 01 and @ are the angles of incidence and refraction, respectively. In an anisotropic
medium, however, the wavenumber К = n(@)kzj is itself a function of 6, so that
эт 91 = n(@, + 9) sind, (6.3-24)
where @, is the angle between the optic axis and the normal to the surface, so that 0, +0
is the angle the refracted ray makes with the optic axis. Equation (6.3-24) is a modified
version of Snell’s law. To solve (6.3-23), we draw the intersection of the k surface with
the plane of incidence and search for an angle 6 for which (6.3-23) is satisfied. Two
solutions, corresponding to the two normal modes, are expected. The polarization state
of the incident light governs the distribution of energy among the two refracted waves.
Take, for example, a uniaxial crystal and a plane of incidence parallel to the optic
axis. The k surfaces intersect the plane of incidence in a circle and an ellipse (Fig. 6.3-
13). The two refracted waves that satisfy the phase-matching condition are determined
by satisfying (6.3-24):
= An ordinary wave of orthogonal polarization (TE) at an angle 9 = 6%, for which
sin 91 = позш 0. ; (6.3-25)
= An extraordinary wave of parallel polarization (TM) at an angle 9 = @,, for which
sin 91 = n(@, + 9.) sin 0. , (6.3-26)
where n(@) is given by (6.3-15).
If the incident wave carries the two polarizations, the two refracted waves will emerge,
as shown in Fig. 6.3-13.
een \ Extraordinary
| Wave
2% pam | om Ordinary
Ч: Ч \ be wave
IF ~~
yy, Nba в Crystal
/*— k surface !
| (air)
| |
| |
Козт 0, Коза 6,
Figure 6.3-13 Determination of the angles of refraction by matching projections of the К vectors
in air and in a uniaxial crystal.

6.3 OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 239
Refraction of Rays
The analysis immediately above dealt with the refraction of plane waves. The refraction
of rays is different in an anisotropic medium, since rays do not necessarily travel in
directions normal to the wavefronts. In air, before entering the crystal, the wavefronts
are normal to the rays. The refracted wave must have a wavevector that satisfies the
phase-matching condition, so that Snell’s law (6.3-24) is applicable, with the angle of
refraction 9 determining the direction of k. However, since the direction of К is not the
direction of the ray, Snell’s law is not applicable to rays in anisotropic media.
|
$ +0,
|
Ordinary
Ope, k surface . ray
ME Extraordinary \ 0)
Ns ray 5
/| Crystal
Air
Figure 6.3-14 Double refraction at normal incidence.

An example that dramatizes the deviation from Snell’s law is that of normal in-
cidence into a uniaxial crystal whose optic axis is neither parallel nor perpendicular
to the crystal boundary. The incident wave has a k vector normal to the boundary.
To ensure phase matching, the refracted waves must also have wavevectors in the same
direction. Intersections with the k surface yield two points corresponding to two waves.
The ordinary ray is parallel to k. But the extraordinary ray points in the direction of
the normal to the К surface, at an angle 9. with the normal to the crystal boundary,
as illustrated in Fig. 6.3-14. Thus, normal incidence creates oblique refraction. The
principle of phase matching is maintained, however: wavefronts of both refracted rays
are parallel to the crystal boundary and to the wavefront of the incident ray.

When light rays are transmitted through a plate of anisotropic material as described
above, the two rays refracted at the first surface refract again at the second surface,
creating two laterally separated rays with orthogonal polarizations, as illustrated in
Fig. 6.3-15.

Extraordinary ray
ea
AZ — ZEEE
ZA
Ordinary ray
Figure 6.3-15 Double refraction through an anisotropic plate. The plate serves as a polarizing
beamsplitter.

240  CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
6.4 OPTICAL ACTIVITY AND MAGNETO-OPTICS
A. Optical Activity
Certain materials act as natural polarization rotators, a property known as optical ac-
tivity. Their normal modes are waves that are circularly, rather than linearly polarized;
waves with right- and left-circular polarizations travel at different phase velocities.
We demonstrate below that an optically active medium with right- and left-circular-
polarization phase velocities c,/n and c,/n_ acts as a polarization rotator with an
angle of rotation 7(n_ — n,)d/A, that is proportional to the thickness of the medium
d. The rotatory power (rotation angle per unit length) of the optically active medium is
therefore
т
p= (n_—n4). (6.4-1)
о Rotatory Power
The direction in which the polarization plane rotates is the same as that of the circularly
polarized component with the greater phase velocity (smaller refractive index). Ifn, <
n_, p is positive and the rotation is in the same direction as the electric-field vector of
the right circularly polarized wave [clockwise when viewed from the direction toward
which the wave is approaching, as illustrated in Fig. 6.4-1(а)]. Such materials are said
to be dextrorotatory, whereas those for which п. > n_ are termed levorotatory.

L] Derivation of the Rotatory Power. Equation (6.4-1) may be derived by decomposing the
incident linearly polarized wave into a sum of right and left circularly polarized components of equal
amplitudes (see Example 6.1-1),

cos#| тб J 1 139 | 1
ee | = 1е В +56" |_/|, (6.4-2)
where 0 is the initial angle of the plane of polarization. After propagating a distance d through the
medium, the phase shifts encountered by the right and left circularly polarized waves are py =
2nn4d/A, and p_ = 2mn_d/Xog, respectively, resulting in a Jones vector
3(9 — y/2
be ве 34+ В + Lele -ie- ‘| = ео cos ( $! ) , (6.4-3)
J = sin (9 — y/2)
where фо = $(p4 + p_)and y = ф_ — py = 2n(n_ — n+)d/Ao. This Jones vector represents а
linearly polarized wave with the plane of polarization rotated by an angle y/2 = л(п_ — п+)а/ Ло,
as provided in (6.4-1). |
Optical activity occurs in materials with an intrinsically helical structure. Examples
include selenium, tellurium, tellurium oxide (TeO2), quartz (a-SiO2), and cinnabar
(HgS). Optically active liquids consist of so-called chiral molecules, which come in
distinct left- and right-handed mirror-image forms. Many organic compounds, such as
amino acids and sugars, exhibit optical activity. Almost all amino acids are levorota-
tory, whereas common sugars come in both forms: dextrose (d-glucose) and levulose
(fructose) are dextrorotatory and levorotatory, respectively, as their names imply. The
rotatory power and sense of rotation for solutions of such substances are therefore
sensitive to both the concentration and structure of the solute. A saccharimeter is used
to determine the optical activity of sugar solutions, from which the sugar concentration
is calculated.

6.4 OPTICAL ACTIVITY AND MAGNETO-OPTICS 241
k k
\ROL \ROL
ala\mya (MA
-L-i-4--+ -L-4--4
ns) ny п} ny
(a) Forward wave (b) Backward wave
Figure 6.4-1 (a) The rotation of the plane of polarization by an optically active medium results
from the difference in the velocities for the two circular polarizations. In this illustration, the right
circularly polarized wave (В) is faster than the left circularly polarized wave (L), 1.е., n+ < n_, so
that р is positive and the material is dextrorotatory. (5) If the wave in (a) is reflected after traversing
the medium, the plane of polarization rotates in the opposite direction so that the wave retraces itself.
Material Equations
A time-varying magnetic flux density B applied to an optically active structure induces
a circulating current, by virtue of its helical character, that sets up an electric dipole
moment (and hence a polarization) proportional to j~B = —V х Е. The optically
active medium is therefore spatially dispersive; i.e., the relation between D(r) and
E(r) is not local. О(г) at position г is determined not only by E(r), but also by
E(r’) at points r’ in the immediate vicinity of r, since it is dependent on the spatial
derivatives contained in V x E(r). For a plane wave, we have E(r) = Eexp(—jk-r)
and Ух Е = —jk x Е, so that the electric permittivity tensor is dependent on the
wavevector k. Spatial dispersiveness is analogous to temporal dispersiveness, which
has its origin in the noninstantaneous response of the medium (see Sec. 5.2). While the
permittivity of a medium exhibiting temporal dispersion depends on the frequency w,
that of a medium exhibiting spatial dispersion depends on the wavevector k.
An optically active medium is described by the k-dependent material equation
D=cE+ jeék x E, (6.4-4)
where € is a pseudoscalar whose sign depends on the handedness of the coordinate
system. This relation is a first-order approximation of the k dependence of the per-
mittivity tensor, under appropriate symmetry conditions.’ The first term represents the
response of an isotropic dielectric medium whereas the second term accounts for the
optical activity, as will be shown subsequently. This О-Е relation is often written in
the form
О =cE+je,G x EB, (6.4-5)
where С = СК is a pseudovector known as the gyration vector. In such media the
vector D is clearly not parallel to E since the vector G x E in (6.4-5) is perpendicular
to E.
Normal Modes of the Optically Active Medium
We proceed to show that the two normal modes of the medium described by (6.4-5) are
circularly polarized waves, and we determine the velocities co/n, and c,/n_ in terms
of the constant G = €k.
1 See, e.g., L. О. Landau, Е. М. Lifshitz, and Г. Р. Pitaevskii, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media,
Butterworth—Heinemann, 2nd English ed. 1984, reprinted with corrections 2004, Chapter 12.

242  CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
We assume that the wave propagates in the z direction, so that k = (0,0, К) and
thus G = (0,0, G). Equation (6.4-5) may then be written in matrix form as
Di п —jG оПЕ
Dy} =e, \jG п? 09|, (6.4-6)
Dz 0 0 п? | | Es
where п? = €/€,. The diagonal elements in (6.4-6) correspond to propagation in an
isotropic medium with refractive index п, whereas the off-diagonal elements, propor-
tional to G, represent the optical activity.

To prove that the normal modes are circularly polarized, consider the two circularly
polarized waves with electric-field vectors Е = (E£o,+jFo,0). The + and — signs
correspond to right and left circularly polarized waves, respectively. Substitution in
(6.4-6) yields D = (Do, ЕТ, 0), where Ро = во(п? + G) Ep. It follows that D =
опа. Е, where
Hence, for either of the two circularly polarized waves the vector D is parallel to
the vector Е. Equation (6.3-11) is satisfied if the wavenumber К = nk,. Thus, the
right and left circularly polarized waves propagate without changing their state of
polarization, with refractive indices п. and n_, respectively. They are therefore the
normal modes for this medium.
ee
EXERCISE 6.4-1
Rotatory Power of an Optically Active Medium. Show that if G < п, the rotatory power of
an optically active medium (rotation of the polarization plane per unit length) is approximately given
by

па
pr Ат . (6.4-8)
> [ии

The rotatory power is strongly dependent on the wavelength. Since С is proportional
to К, as indicated by (6.4-5), it is inversely proportional to the wavelength Ло. Thus,
the rotatory power in (6.4-8) is inversely proportional to \?. Moreover, the refractive
index п is itself wavelength dependent. By way of example, the rotatory power р of
quartz is = 31 deg/mm at A, = 500 nm and = 22 deg/mm at Ло = 600 nm; for silver
thiogallate (AgGaS.), р is = 700 deg/mm at 490 nm and = 500 deg/mm at 500 nm.
B. Magneto-Optics: The Faraday Effect
Many materials act as polarization rotators in the presence of a static magnetic field,
a property known as the Faraday effect. The angle of rotation is then proportional to
the thickness of the material, and the rotatory power р (rotation angle per unit length)
is proportional to the component of the magnetic flux density В in the direction of the
wave propagation,

p=VB, (6.4-9)

6.4 OPTICAL ACTIVITY AND MAGNETO-OPTICS 243
where V is called the Verdet constant.

The sense of rotation is governed by the direction of the magnetic field: for V > 0,
the rotation is in the direction of a right-handed screw pointing in the direction of
the magnetic field [Fig. 6.4-2(a)]. In contrast to optical activity, however, the sense of
rotation does not reverse with the reversal of the direction of propagation of the wave.
Thus, when a wave travels through a Faraday rotator and then reflects back onto itself,
traveling once more through the rotator in the opposite direction, it undergoes twice the
rotation [Fig. 6.4-2(b)]. Materials that exhibit the Faraday effect include glasses as well

_в, _в,
С 20 \
(a) Forward wave (b) Backward wave

Figure 6.4-2 (а) Polarization rotation in a medium exhibiting the Faraday effect. (6) The sense of
rotation is invariant to the direction of travel of the wave.
as yttrium iron garnet (YIG), terbium gallium garnet (TGG), and terbium aluminum
garnet (TbAIG). The Verdet constant of ТЬА1С is У = —1.16 min/Oe-cm at A, =
500 nm. Thin films of these ferrimagnetic materials are used to make compact devices.
Material Equations
In magneto-optic materials, the electric permittivity tensor е is altered by the appli-
cation of a static magnetic field H, so that e = e(H). This effect originates from the
interaction of the static magnetic field with the motion of the electrons in the material in
response to an optical electric field E. For the Faraday effect, in particular, the material
equation is

D=cE+jeGxE (6.4-10)
with

а = В. (6.4-11)

Here, В = ИН is Фе static magnetic flux density, and y, is а constant of the medium
known as the magnetogyration coefficient.

Equation (6.4-10) is identical to (6.4-5) so that the vector G = „В in Faraday
rotators plays the role of the gyration vector С = &К in optically active media. For
the Faraday effect, however, G does not depend on k, so that reversing the direction
of propagation does not reverse the sense of rotation of the plane of polarization. This
property is useful for constructing optical isolators, as explained in Sec. 6.6D.

With this analogy, and using (6.4-8), we conclude that the rotatory power of the
Faraday medium is р = —7G/Aon = —п7ьВ/Лоп, from which the Verdet constant
(rotatory power per unit magnetic flux density) is seen to be

п
Aon
The Verdet constant is clearly a function of the wavelength Ло.

244 CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
6.5 OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS

Liquid Crystals
A liquid crystal comprises a collection of elongated organic molecules that are typ-
ically cigar-shaped. The molecules lack positional order (like liquids) but possess
orientational order (like crystals). There are three types (phases) of liquid crystals,
as illustrated in Fig. 6.5-1:

Я ie Y

ie ИИ it Ye

Ota tg Ue (OC COONEY eae
ОО И a
CHAN aM
DOF Og ОА 00-0 000-0 00 Oy)

(a) Nematic (b) Smectic (c) Cholesteric

Figure 6.5-1 Molecular organizations of different types of liquid crystals.

= In nematic liquid crystals the orientations of the molecules tend to be the same

but their positions are totally random.

= In smectic liquid crystals the orientations of the molecules are the same, but their

centers are stacked in parallel layers within which they have random positions;
they therefore have positional order only in one dimension.

= The cholesteric liquid crystal is a distorted form of its nematic cousin in which

the orientations undergo helical rotation about an axis.
Liquid crystallinity, which was discovered in 1888, is a fluid state of matter; it is
intermediate between liquid and solid. The molecules are able to change orientation
when subjected to a force. When a thin layer of liquid crystal is placed between
two parallel glass plates that are rubbed together, for example, the molecules orient
themselves along the direction of rubbing.

Twisted nematic liquid crystals are nematic liquid crystals on which a twist (sim-
ilar to the twist that exists naturally in the cholesteric phase) is externally imposed.
This can be achieved, for example, by placing a thin layer of nematic liquid crystal
between two glass plates that are polished in perpendicular directions, as schematized
in Fig. 6.5-2. This section is devoted to a discussion of the optical properties of twisted
nematic liquid crystals, which are widely used in photonics, e.g., for liquid-crystal
displays. The electro-optic properties of twisted nematic liquid crystals, and their use
as optical modulators and switches, are described in Sec. 21.3.

3
3 Figure 6.5-2 Molecular orientations of the
i | / 2 twisted nematic liquid crystal.
я
=
2
фо °

6.5 OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS 245
Optical Properties of Twisted Nematic Liquid Crystals
The twisted nematic liquid crystal is an optically inhomogeneous and anisotropic
medium that acts locally as a uniaxial crystal, with the optic axis parallel to the
elongated direction. The optical properties are conveniently analyzed by considering
the material to be divided into thin layers perpendicular to the axis of twist, each of
which acts as a uniaxial crystal; the optic axis is taken to rotate gradually, in a helical
fashion, along the axis of twist (Fig. 6.5-3). The cumulative effects of these layers
on the transmitted wave is then calculated. We show that, under certain conditions,
the twisted nematic liquid crystal acts as a polarization rotator in which the plane of
polarization rotates in alignment with the molecular twist.

x Optic
9 и axis
nw
/ / к
и 174 7 Ss
UW Yep
yl Gi), (7 SS
y

Figure 6.5-3 Propagation of light in a twisted nematic liquid crystal. In this diagram the angle of
twist is 90°.

Consider the propagation of light along the axis of twist (the z axis) of a twisted
nematic liquid crystal and assume that the twist angle 9 varies linearly with z,

9 = а, (6.5-1)
where сх is the twist coefficient (degrees per unit length). The optic axis is therefore
parallel to the x—y plane and makes an angle 9 with the x direction. The ordinary and
extraordinary refractive indices are 7» and ne, respectively (typically, пе > по), and
the phase-retardation coefficient (retardation per unit length) is

В = (пе — No) ko. (6.5-2)
The liquid-crystal cell is completely characterized by the twist coefficient a and the
retardation coefficient (.

In practice, В >> а so that many cycles of phase retardation are introduced before
the optic axis rotates appreciably. We show below that if this condition is satisfied,
and the incident wave at z = 0 is linearly polarized in the x direction, then the wave
maintains its linearly polarized state but the plane of polarization rotates in alignment
with the molecular twist, so that the angle of rotation is 9 = az and the total rotation
in a crystal of length d is the angle of twist ad. The liquid-crystal cell then serves
as a polarization rotator with rotatory power a. The polarization-rotation property of
the twisted nematic liquid crystal is useful for making display devices, as explained in
Sec. 21.3.

246 CHAPTER 6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
[Proof that the Twisted Nematic Liquid Crystal Acts as a Polarization Rotator. We proceed
to show that the twisted nematic liquid crystal acts as a polarization rotator if В >> a. We divide the
overall width of the cell d into N incremental layers of equal widths Az = d/N. The mth layer,
located at the distance z = 2„, = mAz,m = 1,2,...,N, is a wave retarder whose slow axis (the
optic axis) makes an angle 9„ = тд with the x axis, where AO = aAz. It therefore has а Jones
matrix [see (6.1-24)]
Tn = R(-6@m) Т, R(Om), (6.5-3)
where
_ jexp(—jnek, Az) 0
т, = 0 exp(—jnok, Az) (6.5-4)
is the Jones matrix of a wave retarder whose axis is along the x direction and R(6) is the coordinate
rotation matrix in (6.1-22).
It is convenient to rewrite T,. in terms of the phase-retardation coefficient В = (п. — по)Ко,
_ exp (—jAz/2) 0
T, = exp(—jpAz) 0 exp (78Д=/2) | * (6.5-5)
where ф = (no + пе)Ко/2. Since multiplying the Jones vector by a constant phase factor does not
affect the state of polarization, we simply ignore the prefactor exp(—jpAz) in (6.5-5).
The overall Jones matrix of the device is the product
1 1
T= [[ T.»= [J RC.) T, в»). (6.5-6)
m=N m=N
Using (6.5-3) and noting that В.(9„) R(—A@n-1) = R(@m — Om—-1) = R(AQ), we obtain
T = R(—6y) [Т,В(А0)^ "т, В). (6.5-7)
Substituting from (6.5-5) and (6.1-22), we obtain
_ jexp(—jBAz/2) 0 cos aAz sinaAz
т, R(A8) = 0 exp (j8Az/2)|| —sinaAz cosaAz|* (6.5-8)
Using (6.5-7) and (6.5-8), the Jones matrix T of the device can, in principle, be determined in terms
of the parameters a, 3, and а = NAz.
For a < 8, we may assume that the incremental rotation matrix R(A@) is approximately the
identity matrix, whereupon
N
~ N _ exp (—jBAz/2) 0
TR(-6y) [TY RO)=RE-avay [PY dy
RO exp (~j8NAz/2) 0
= R(-aNAz) 0 exp (j8NAz/2)|° (6.5-9)
so that
— R(_aq) |exP (-584/2) 0
T = R(-ad) д exp (184/2)| ° (6.5-10)
This Jones matrix represents a wave retarder of retardation Gd with the slow axis along the x
direction, followed by a polarization rotator with rotation angle ad. If the original wave is linearly
polarized along the x direction, the wave retarder imparts only a phase shift; the device then simply
rotates the polarization by an angle ad equal to the twist angle. A wave linearly polarized along the
y direction is rotated by the same angle. ||

6.6 POLARIZATION DEVICES 247
6.6 POLARIZATION DEVICES
This section offers a brief description of a number of devices that are used to modify
the state of polarization of light. The basic principles underlying the operation of these
devices have been set forth earlier in this chapter.
A. Polarizers
A linear polarizer is a device that transmits the component of the electric field that lies
along the direction of its transmission axis while blocking the orthogonal component.
The blocking action may be achieved by selective absorption, selective reflection from
isotropic media, or selective reflection/refraction in anisotropic media.
Polarization by Selective Absorption (Dichroism)
The absorption of light by certain anisotropic media, called dichroic materials, de-
pends on the direction of the incident electric field (Fig. 6.6-1). These materials gener-
ally have anisotropic molecular structures whose response is sensitive to the direction
of the electric field. The most common dichroic material is Polaroid H-sheet, invented
in 1938 and still in common use. It is fabricated from a sheet of iodine-impregnated
polyvinyl alcohol that is heated and stretched in a particular direction. The analogous
device in the infrared is the wire-grid polarizer, which comprises a planar configura-
tion of closely spaced fine wires stretched in a single direction. The component of the
incident electric field in the direction of the wires is absorbed whereas the component
perpendicular to the wires passes through.
1.0
У Maximum
0.8
й
и * 2
y 8 06
x | Е
Е 0.4
р [|
iy 0.2
y Minimum
| ae 0.0
Polarizer 400 600 800 1000 1200
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 6.6-1 Power transmittances of a typical dichroic polarizer with the plane of polarization of
the light aligned for maximum and minimum transmittance, as indicated.
Polarization by Selective Reflection
The reflectance of light at the boundary between two isotropic dielectric materials is
dependent on its polarization, as discussed in Sec. 6.2. At the Brewster angle of inci-
dence, in particular, the reflectance of TM-polarized light vanishes so that it is totally
refracted (Fig. 6.2-4). At this angle, therefore, only TE-polarized light is reflected, so
that the reflector serves as a polarizer, as depicted in Fig. 6.6-2.
Polarization by Selective Refraction (Polarizing Beamsplitters)
When light enters an anisotropic crystal, the ordinary and extraordinary waves refract
at different angles and gradually separate from each other (see Sec. 6.3E and Fig. 6.3-
15). This provides an effective means for obtaining polarized light from unpolarized

248 CHAPTER6 POLARIZATION OPTICS
TE
“oe
ТМ
7 Figure 6.6-2 The Brewster-angle polar-
1Zer.
light, and it is commonly used. These devices usually consist of two cemented prisms
comprising anisotropic (uniaxial) materials, often with different orientations, as il-
lustrated by the examples in Fig. 6.6-3. These prisms therefore serve as polarizing
beamsplitters.
i a
© © ^
© о. < т © © Е 1 © “te 3 © ©
ee
4 Cement OA ©
OA® OA® ~
(a) Wollaston prism (b) Rochon prism (c) Glan-Thompson prism
Figure 6.6-3 Examples of polarizing beamsplitters. The parallel (p) and orthogonal (s) polari-
zation components of a beam are separated by refraction or reflection at the boundary between two
uniaxial crystals whose optic axes (OA) have different orientations. In this illustration, the crystals
are negative uniaxial (ng > пе), such as calcite. (a) In the Wollaston prism the р component
is extraordinary in the first crystal and ordinary in the second, while the opposite is true for the
5 component, so that they undergo different angles of refraction. (b) In the Rochon prism, the
p component is transmitted without refraction since it is ordinary in both crystals, while the s
component is refracted since it is ordinary in the first crystal and extraordinary in the second. (c) The
operation of the Glan-Thompson prism is based on total internal reflection at the boundary between
the first crystal and the cement layer. This occurs for only the p polarization since it is an ordinary
wave with the higher refractive index. The $ component is transmitted. The Glan—Thompson device
has the merit of providing a large angular separation between the emerging waves.
B. Wave Retarders
A wave retarder serves to convert a wave with one form of polarization into another
form. It is characterized by its retardation Г and its fast and slow axes (see Sec. 6.1B).
The normal modes are linearly polarized waves polarized along the directions of the
axes. The velocities of the two waves differ so that transmission through the retarder
imparts a relative phase shift Г to these modes.

Wave retarders are often constructed from anisotropic crystals in the form of plates.
As explained in Sec. 6.3B, when light travels along a principal axis of a crystal (say
the z axis), the normal modes are linearly polarized waves pointing along the two
other principal axes (the x and y axes). These modes experience the principal refractive
indices п1 and ng, and thus travel at velocities c,/n1 and со/п2, respectively. If ny <
ng, the т axis is the fast axis. If the plate has thickness d, the phase retardation is
Г = (ng — 14) kod = 27(n2 — n1)d/Xo. The retardation is thus directly proportional
to the thickness d of the plate and inversely proportional to the wavelength Ло (note,
however, that ng — пл is itself wavelength dependent).

The refractive indices of a thin sheet of mica, for example, are 1.599 and 1.594 at
Ao = 633 пт, so that Г/4 = 15.87 rad/mm. A sheet of thickness 63.3 zm yields
Г = лапа thus serves as a half-wave retarder.

6.6 POLARIZATION DEVICES 249
Light Intensity Control via a Wave Retarder and Two Polarizers
Consider a wave retarder of retardation Г placed between two crossed polarizers whose
axes are oriented at 45° with respect to the axes of the retarder, as illustrated in Fig. 6.6-
4. The power (or intensity) transmittance of this system is
J = sin?(I'/2), (6.6-1)
which may be established by making use of Jones matrices or by examining the polar-
ization ellipse of the retarded light as a function of I’, and then determining the com-
ponent that lies in the direction of the output polarizer, as illustrated in Fig. 6.6-4. If
Г = 0 no light is transmitted through the system since the polarizers are orthogonal.
On the other hand, if [ = z all of the light is transmitted since the retarder then rotates
the plane of polarization 90° whereupon it matches the transmission axis of the second
polarizer.
У} r=0
п.
У 45° 4т о --------д----
(| 2 3a 2
Yi FN) 4 в
Al x п Е
|8 , % п Qn Эл 4
| Polarizer 5 Retarder Polarizer Polarization Retardation Г
ellipses
Figure 6.6-4 Controlling light intensity by means of a wave retarder with variable retardation Г
placed between two crossed polarizers.

The intensity of the transmitted light is thus readily controlled by altering the re-
tardation I’. This can be achieved, for example, by deliberately changing the indices
пл and nz by application of an external DC electric field to the retarder. This is the
basic principle that underlies the operation of electro-optic modulators, as discussed in
Chapter 21.

Furthermore, since Г depends on d, slight variations in the thickness of a sample can
be monitored by examining the pattern of the transmitted light. Moreover, since Г is
wavelength dependent, the transmittance of the system is frequency sensitive. Though
it can be used as a filter, the selectivity is not sharp. Other configurations using wave
retarders and polarizers can be used to construct narrowband transmission filters.

C. Polarization Rotators

A polarization rotator serves to rotate the plane of polarization of linearly polarized
light by a fixed angle, while maintaining its linearly polarized nature. Optically active
media and materials exhibiting the Faraday effect act as polarization rotators, as dis-
cussed in Sec. 6.4. The twisted nematic liquid crystal also acts as a polarization rotator
under certain conditions, as shown in Sec. 6.5.

If a polarization rotator is placed between two polarizers, the amount of light trans-
mitted depends on the rotation angle. The intensity of the light can therefore be con-
trolled (modulated) if the angle of rotation is externally changed (e.g., by varying
the magnetic flux density applied to a Faraday rotator or by changing the molecular
orientation of a liquid crystal by means of an applied electric field). Electro-optic
modulation of light and liquid-crystal display devices are discussed in Chapter 21.

250 — СНАРТЕВ6 POLARIZATION OPTICS

0. Nonreciprocal Polarization Devices

A device whose effect on the polarization state is invariant to reversal of the direction
of propagation is said to be reciprocal. If a wave is transmitted through such a device
in one direction and the emerging wave is retransmitted in the opposite direction, then
it retraces the changes in the polarization state and arrives at the input in the very same
initial polarization state. Devices that do not have this directional invariance are termed
nonreciprocal. All of the polarization systems described in this chapter are reciprocal,
with the exception of the Faraday rotator (Sec. 6.4B). A number of useful nonreciprocal
polarization devices may be implemented by combining the Faraday rotator with other
reciprocal polarization components (see Sec. 24.1С).

Optical Isolator

An optical isolator is a device that transmits light in only one direction, thereby
acting as a “one-way valve.” Optical isolators are useful for preventing reflected light
from returning back to the source. Such feedback can have deleterious effects on the
operation of certain devices, such as laser diodes.

An optical isolator is constructed by placing a Faraday rotator between two po-
larizers whose axes make a 45° angle with respect to each other. The magnetic flux
density applied to the rotator is adjusted so that it rotates the polarization by 45°
in the direction of a right-handed screw pointing in the z direction [Fig. 6.6-5(a)].
Light traveling through the system in the forward direction (from left to right) thus
crosses polarizer A, rotates 45°, and is thence transmitted through polarizer B. Linearly
polarized light with the polarization plane at 45° but traveling through the system in the
backward direction [from right to left in Fig. 6.6-5(b)] successfully crosses polarizer B.
However, on passing through the Faraday rotator, the plane of polarization rotates an
additional 45° and is therefore blocked by polarizer A. Since the backward light might
be generated by reflection of the forward wave from subsequent surfaces, the isolator
serves to protect its source from reflected light.

Note that the Faraday rotator is a necessary component of the optical isolator. An
optically active, or liquid-crystal, polarization rotator cannot be used in its place. In
those reciprocal components, the sense of rotation is such that the polarization of the
reflected wave retraces that of the incident wave so that the light would be transmitted
back through the polarizers to the source.

ty 45°
№ Prransmited 45 °
B 45° wave Le 45
су Polarizer В By = ee Ve
Incident Mu * Cy
wave y Faraday Polarizer B
rotator <>
Polarizer A
Ill y Faraday
rotator
(a) Polarizer A (b)
Figure 6.6-5 An optical isolator that makes use of a Faraday rotator transmits light in one
direction. (a) A wave traveling in the forward direction is transmitted. (b) A wave traveling in the
backward (or reverse) direction is blocked.

Faraday-rotator isolators constructed from yttrium iron garnet (YIG) or terbium
gallium garnet (TGG) offer attenuations of the backward wave of up to 90 dB over
a relatively wide wavelength range. Thin films of these materials placed in permanent
magnetic fields are used to make compact optical isolators.

READING LIST 251
Nonreciprocal Polarization Rotation
The combination of a 45° Faraday rotator and a half-wave retarder is another useful
nonreciprocal device. As illustrated in Fig. 6.6-6(a), the state of polarization of a
forward-traveling linearly polarized wave, with its plane of polarization oriented at
22.5° with the fast axis of the retarder, maintains its state of polarization upon trans-
mission through the device (since it undergoes 45° rotation by the Faraday rotator,
followed by —45° rotation by the retarder). However, for a wave traveling in the
reverse direction, the plane of polarization is rotated by 45° + 45° = 90°, as can
be readily seen in Fig. 6.6-6(b). This device may therefore be used in combination with
a polarizing beamsplitter to deflect the backward-traveling wave away from the source
of the forward-traveling wave so that it can be accessed independently. A system of
this kind can be useful for implementing nonreciprocal interconnects, such as optical
circulators, as portrayed in Fig. 24.1-10(6).
22.5°
22.50 /
By 45° !j; fo
Retarder NSS ae
п
СУ Retarder
оной =
Faraday
(a) (b) rotator
Figure 6.6-6 A Faraday rotator followed by a half-wave (п) retarder is a nonreciprocal device that:
(a) maintains the polarization state of a linearly polarized forward-traveling wave, but (b) rotates the
plane of polarization of the backward-traveling wave by 90°.
READING LIST
Polarization
See also the reading list on general optics in Chapter 1 and the reading list in Chapter 5.
A. Kumar and A. Ghatak, Polarization of Light with Applications in Optical Fibers, SPIE Optical
Engineering Press, 2011.
р. H. Goldstein, Polarized Light, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 3rd ed. 2010.
Г. Nikolova and Р. $. Ramanujam, Polarization Holography, Cambridge University Press, 2009.
R. Martinez-Herrero, P. M. Mejias, and G. Piquero, Characterization of Partially Polarized Light
Fields, Springer-Verlag, 2009.
E. Collett, Field Guide to Polarization, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2005.
J. N. Damask, Polarization Optics in Telecommunications, Springer-Verlag, 2004.
S. Sugano and N. Kojima, eds., Magneto-Optics, Springer-Verlag, 2000.
C. Brosseau, Fundamentals of Polarized Light: A Statistical Optics Approach, Wiley, 1998.
S. Huard, Polarization of Light, Wiley, 1996.
E. Collett, Polarized Light: Fundamentals and Applications, CRC Press, 1993.
A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals: Propagation and Control of Laser Radiation, Wiley,
1985, paperback reprint 2002.
R. M. A. Azzam and N. M. Bashara, Ellipsometry and Polarized Light, North-Holland, 1977,
reprinted 1989.

252 CHAPTER 6 POLARIZATION OPTICS

B. A. Robson, The Theory of Polarization Phenomena, Clarendon, 1974.

L. Velluz, M. Le Grand, and M. Grosjean, Optical Circular Dichroism: Principles, Measurements,
and Applications, Academic Press, 1965.

W. А. Shurcliff and 5. $. Ballard, Polarized Light, Van Nostrand, 1964.

W. A. Shurcliff, Polarized Light: Production and Use, Harvard University Press, 1962, reprinted
1966.

Crystals and Tensor Analysis

C. Malgrange, C. Ricolleau, and M. Schlenker, Symmetry and Physical Properties of Crystals,
Springer-Verlag, 2014.

D. Fleisch, A Student’s Guide to Vectors and Tensors, Cambridge University Press, 2011.

S. Hausstihl, Physical Properties of Crystals, Wiley-VCH, 2007.

R. J. D. Tilley, Crystals and Crystal Structures, Wiley, 2006.

E. A. Wood, Crystals and Light: An Introduction to Optical Crystallography, Dover, 2nd ed. 1977.

J. Е Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals: Their Representation by Tensors and Matrices, Oxford
University Press, 1985.

Liquid Crystals

See also the reading list on liquid crystal devices and displays in Chapter 21.

J. У. Selinger, Introduction to the Theory of Soft Matter: From Ideal Gases to Liquid Crystals,
Springer-Verlag, 2016.

I.-C. Khoo, Liquid Crystals, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2007.

T. Scharf, Polarized Light in Liquid Crystals and Polymers, Wiley, 2006.

P. Oswald and P. Pieranski, Nematic and Cholesteric Liquid Crystals: Concepts and Physical Prop-
erties Illustrated by Experiments, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2005.

Р. J. Collings, Liquid Crystals: Nature’s Delicate Phase of Matter, Princeton University Press, 2nd
ed. 2002.

M. E. Lines and A. M. Glass, Principles and Applications of Ferroelectrics and Related Materials,
Clarendon, 1977; Oxford University Press, paperback 2nd ed. 2001.

P. G. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals, Oxford University Press, 2nd ed. 1993.

S. Chandrasekhar, Liquid Crystals, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 1992.

L. M. Blinov, Electro-Optical and Magneto-Optical Properties of Liquid Crystals, Wiley, 1983.

Articles

L. A. Whitehead and M. A. Mossman, Reflections on Total Internal Reflection, Optics & Photonics
News, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 28-34, 2009.

М. Mansuripur, The Faraday Effect, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 10, no. 11, рр. 32-36, 1999.

B. H. Billings, ed., Selected Papers on Applications of Polarized Light, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 57), 1992.

S. D. Jacobs, ed., Selected Papers on Liquid Crystals for Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 46), 1992.

B. H. Billings, ed., Selected Papers on Polarization, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 23), 1990.

A. Lakhtakia, ed., Selected Papers on Natural Optical Activity, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 15), 1990.

W. Swindell, ed., Benchmark Papers in Optics: Polarized Light, Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross, 1975.

Sir David Brewster’s Scientific Work, Nature, vol. 25, рр. 157-159, 15 December 1881.

PROBLEMS
6.1-5 Orthogonal Polarizations. Show that if two elliptically polarized states are orthogonal, the
major axes of their ellipses are perpendicular and the senses of rotation are opposite.
6.1-6 Rotating a Polarization Rotator. Show that the Jones matrix of a polarization rotator is
invariant to rotation of the coordinate system.

PROBLEMS 253

6.1-7 Jones Matrix of a Polarizer. Show that the Jones matrix of a linear polarizer whose trans-
mission axis makes an angle 9 with the x axis is

T= cos?6 — sin@ cos 0
— |sin 8 cos @ sin? 6 |’
Derive this result using (6.1-18), (6.1-22), and (6.1-24).

6.1-8 Half-Wave Retarder. Consider linearly polarized light passed through a half-wave retarder.
If the polarization plane makes an angle 9 with the fast axis of the retarder, show that the
transmitted light is linearly polarized at an angle —9, i.e., it is rotated by an angle 20. Why is
the half-wave retarder not equivalent to a polarization rotator?

6.1-9 Wave Retarders in Tandem. Write the Jones matrices for:

(а) A ^/2 wave retarder with the fast axis along the x direction.

(b) Ал wave retarder with the fast axis at 45° to the x direction.

(с) А ™/2 wave retarder with the fast axis along the у direction.

If these three retarders are cascaded (placed in tandem), with (c) following (b) following (a),
show that the resulting device introduces a 90° rotation. What happens if the order of the
three retarders is reversed?

6.1-10 Reflection of Circularly Polarized Light. Show that circularly polarized light changes
handedness (right becomes left, and vice versa), upon reflection from a mirror.

6.1-11 Anti-Glare Screen. A self-luminous object is viewed through a glass window. An anti-
glare screen is used to eliminate glare caused by the reflection of background light from
the surfaces of the window. Show that such a screen may be constructed from a combination
of a linear polarizer and a quarter-wave retarder whose axes are at 45° with respect to the
transmission axis of the polarizer. Can the screen be regarded as an optical isolator?

6.2-2 Derivation of Fresnel Equations. Derive the reflection equation (6.2-6), which is used to
derive the Fresnel equation (6.2-8) for TE polarization. How would you go about obtaining
the reflection coefficient if the incident light took the form of a beam rather than a plane
wave?

6.2-3 Reflectance of Glass. A plane wave is incident from air (п = 1) onto a glass plate (п = 1.5)
at an angle of incidence of 45°. Determine the power reflectances of the TE and TM waves.
What is the average reflectance for unpolarized light (light carrying TE and TM waves of
equal intensities)?

6.2-4 Refraction at the Brewster Angle. Use the condition п: зес 01 = ng sec 05 and Snell’s
law, пл sin 0, = nz sin 65, to derive (6.2-12) for the Brewster angle. Also show that at the
Brewster angle, 91 + 02 = 90°, so that the directions of the reflected and refracted waves are
orthogonal, and hence the electric field of the refracted TM wave is parallel to the direction
of the reflected wave. The reflection of light may be regarded as a scattering process in
which the refracted wave acts as a source of radiation generating the reflected wave. At the
Brewster angle, this source oscillates in a direction parallel to the direction of propagation of
the reflected wave, so that radiation cannot occur and no TM light is reflected.

6.2-5 Retardation Associated with Total Internal Reflection. Determine the phase retardation
between the TE and TM waves that is introduced by total internal reflection at the boundary
between glass (n = 1.5) and air (п = 1) at an angle of incidence 6 = 1.20%, where 0. is the
critical angle.

6.2-6 Goos—Hanchen Shift. Consider two TE plane waves undergoing total internal reflection at
angles 9 and @ + 40, where 40 is an incremental angle. If the phase retardation introduced
between the reflected waves is written in the form dy = &40, find an expression for the
coefficient €. Sketch the interference patterns of the two incident waves and the two reflected
waves and verify that they are shifted by a lateral distance proportional to €. When the
incident wave is a beam (composed of many plane-wave components), the reflected beam
is displaced laterally by a distance proportional to €. This is known as the Goos—Hanchen
effect.

6.2-7 Reflection from an Absorptive Medium. Use Maxwell’s equations and appropriate bound-
ary conditions to show that the complex amplitude reflectance at the boundary between free
space and a medium with refractive index n and absorption coefficient a, at normal incidence,
ist = [(n — jac/2w) — 1]/[(n — jac/2w) +1.

254 CHAPTER 6 POLARIZATION OPTICS

6.3-1 Maximum Retardation in Quartz. Quartz is a positive uniaxial crystal with п. = 1.553
and по = 1.544. (a) Determine the retardation per mm at Л. = 633 nm when the crystal is
oriented such that retardation is maximized. (b) At what thickness(es) does the crystal act as
a quarter-wave retarder?

6.3-2 Maximum Extraordinary Effect. Determine the direction of propagation in quartz (п. =
1.553 and п. = 1.544) at which the angle between the wavevector К and the Poynting vector
S (which is also the direction of ray propagation) is maximum.

6.3-3 Double Refraction. An unpolarized plane wave is incident from free space onto a quartz
crystal (п. = 1.553 and n, = 1.544) at an angle of incidence 30°. The optic axis lies in the
plane of incidence and is perpendicular to the direction of the incident wave before it enters
the crystal. Determine the directions of the wavevectors and the rays of the two refracted
components.

6.3-4 Lateral Shift in Double Refraction. What is the optimum geometry for maximizing the
lateral shift between the refracted ordinary and extraordinary beams in a positive uniaxial
crystal? Indicate all pertinent angles and directions.

6.3-5 Transmission Through a LiNbO; Plate. Examine the transmission of an unpolarized He—
Ne laser beam (A, = 633 nm) normally incident on a LiNbO3 plate (п. = 2.29, п, = 2.20)
of thickness 1 cm, cut such that its optic axis makes an angle 45° with the normal to the plate.
Determine the lateral shift at the output of the plate and the retardation between the ordinary
and extraordinary beams.

*6.3-6 Conical Refraction. When the wavevector К points along an optic axis of a biaxial crystal
an unusual situation occurs. The two sheets of the k surface meet and the surface can be
approximated by a conical surface. Consider a ray normally incident on the surface of a
biaxial crystal for which one of its optic axes is also normal to the surface. Show that
multiple refraction occurs with the refracted rays forming a cone. This effect is known as
conical refraction. What happens when the conical rays refract from the parallel surface of
the crystal into air?

6.6-1 Circular Dichroism. Certain materials have different absorption coefficients for right and
left circularly polarized light, a property known as circular dichroism. Determine the Jones
matrix for a device that converts light with any state of polarization into right circularly
polarized light.

6.6-2 Polarization Rotation by a Sequence of Linear Polarizers. A wave that is linearly po-
larized in the x direction is transmitted through a sequence of NV linear polarizers whose
transmission axes are inclined by angles 710 (т = 1,2,...,N; 0 = m/2N) with respect
to the x axis. Show that the transmitted light is linearly polarized in the у direction but its
amplitude is reduced by the factor cos%@. What happens in the limit as № - 00? Hint: Use
Jones matrices and note that

В/(т + 19] R(—mé) = R(9),
where R(@) is the coordinate transformation matrix.

CHAPTER
ee
7.1 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA 258

A. Matrix Theory of Multilayer Optics
B. Fabry—Perot Etalon
C. Bragg Grating
7.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 277
A. Bloch Modes
B. Matrix Optics of Periodic Media
C. Fourier Optics of Periodic Media
D. Boundaries Between Periodic and Homogeneous Media
7.3. TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 291
A. Two-Dimensional Photonic Crystals
*B. Three-Dimensional Photonic Crystals
Felix Bloch (1905-1983) de- Eli Yablonovitch (born 1946) Sajeev John (born 1957) in-
veloped a theory that describes  сошуещеЯ the concept of the voked the notion of photon
electron waves in the periodic photonic bandgap; he made the _ localization and coinvented the
structure of solids. first photonic-bandgap crystal.  photonic-bandgap concept.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
255

CSC
The propagation of light in homogeneous media and its reflection and refraction at the
boundaries between different media are a principal concern of optics, as described
in the earlier chapters of this book. Photonic devices often comprise multiple lay-
ers of different materials arranged, for example, to suppress or enhance reflectance
or to alter the spectral or the polarization characteristics of light. Multilayered and
stratified media are also found in natural physical and biological systems and are
responsible for the distinct colors of some insects and butterfly wings. Multilayered
media can also be periodic, i.e., comprise identical dielectric structures replicated in
a one-, two-, or three-dimensional periodic arrangement, as illustrated in Fig. 7.0-1.
One-dimensional periodic structures include stacks of identical parallel planar multi-
layer segments. These are often used as gratings that reflect optical waves incident at
certain angles, or as filters that selectively reflect waves of certain frequencies. Two-
dimensional periodic structures include sets of parallel rods as well as sets of parallel
cylindrical holes, such as those used to modify the characteristics of optical fibers
known as holey fibers (see Sec. 10.4). Three-dimensional periodic structures comprise
arrays of cubes, spheres, or holes of various shapes, organized in lattice structures
much like those found in natural crystals. Photonic crystals are a special class of optical
metamaterials, which are considered in Chapter 8.
~~
pee. gee
eae) Nek ——
Duk es ==
PSS SBN Sane
Os eee
ЕСН
ID 2D 3D

Figure 7.0-1 Periodic photonic structures in one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), and
three-dimensional (3D) configurations.

Optical waves, which are inherently periodic, interact with periodic media in a
unique way, particularly when the scale of the periodicity is of the same order as that
of the wavelength. For example, spectral bands emerge in which light waves cannot
propagate through the medium without severe attenuation. Waves with frequencies
lying within these forbidden bands, called photonic bandgaps, behave in a manner
akin to total internal reflection, but are applicable for all directions. The dissolution of
the transmitted wave is a result of destructive interference among the waves scattered
by elements of the periodic structure in the forward direction. Remarkably, this effect
extends over finite spectral bands, rather than occurring for just single frequencies.

This phenomenon is analogous to the electronic properties of crystalline solids such
as semiconductors. In that case, the periodic wave associated with an electron travels
in a periodic crystal lattice, and energy bandgaps often materialize. Because of this
analogy, the photonic periodic structures have come to be called photonic crystals.
Photonic crystals enjoy a whole raft of applications, including use as waveguides,
fibers, resonators, lasers, filters, routers, switches, gates, and sensors; other applications
are in the offing.

An electromagnetic-optics analysis is usually required to describe the optical prop-
erties of inhomogeneous media such as multilayered and periodic materials. For in-
homogeneous dielectric media, as we know from Sec. 5.2B, the permittivity с(г) is
256

CHAPTER 7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS 257
spatially varying and the wave equation takes the general forms of (5.2-16) and (5.2-
17). For a harmonic wave of angular frequency w, this leads to generalized Helmholtz
equations for the electric and the magnetic fields expressible as
w?
n(r) Ух (V x E) = ak, (7.0-1)
о
и?
Ух (г) УхН] = GH, (7.0-2)
Со Generalized
Helmholtz Equations
where n(r) = €,/e(r) is the electric impermeability (see Sec. 6.3A). One of these
equations may be solved for either the electric or the magnetic field, and the other
field may be directly determined by use of Maxwell’s equations. Note that (7.0-1) and
(7.0-2) are cast in the form of an eigenvalue problem: a differential operator applied on
the field function equals a constant multiplied by the field function. The eigenvalues
are w*/c? and the eigenfunctions provide the spatial distributions of the modes of the
propagating field (see Appendix C). For reasons to be explained in Secs. 7.2C and 7.3,
we work with the magnetic-field equation (7.0-2) rather than the electric-field equation
(7.0-1).

For multilayered media, с(г) is piecewise constant, 1.е., it is uniform within any
given layer but changes from one layer to another. Wave propagation can then be
studied by using the known properties of optical waves in homogeneous media, to-
gether with the appropriate boundary conditions that dictate the laws of reflection and
transmission.

Periodic dielectric media are characterized by periodic values of с(г) and n(r).
This periodicity imposes certain conditions on the optical wave. For example, the
propagation constant deviates from simply proportionality to the angular frequency
w, as for a homogeneous medium. While the modes of propagation in a homogeneous
medium are plane waves of the form exp(—jk - r), the modes of the periodic medium,
known as Bloch modes, are traveling waves modulated by standing waves.

This Chapter

Previous chapters have focused on the optics of thin optical components that are well
separated, such as thin lenses, planar gratings, and image-bearing films across which
the light travels. This chapter addresses the optics of bulk media comprising multiple
dielectric layers and periodic 1D, 2D, and 3D photonic structures. Section 7.1, in which
1D layered media are considered, serves as a prelude to periodic media and photonic
crystals. A matrix approach offers a systematic treatment of the multiple reflections
that occur at the multiple boundaries of the medium. Section 7.2 introduces photonic
crystals in their simplest form — 1D periodic structures. Matrix methods are adopted to
determine the dispersion relation and the band structure. An alternate approach, based
on a Fourier-series representation of the periodic functions associated with the medium
and the wave, is also presented. These results are generalized in Sec. 7.3 to two- and
three-dimensional photonic crystals.

Throughout this chapter, the various media are assumed to be isotropic, and there-
fore described by a scalar permittivity е, although reflection and refraction at bound-
aries have inherent polarization-sensitive characteristics.

Photonic Crystals in Other Chapters
By virtue of their omnidirectional reflection property, photonic crystals can be used
as “perfect” dielectric mirrors. A slab of homogeneous medium embedded in a pho-

258 = CHAPTER7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
tonic crystal may be used to guide light by multiple reflections from the boundaries.
Applications to optical waveguides are described in Sec. 9.5. Similarly, light may be
guided through an optical fiber with a homogeneous core embedded in a cladding of
the same material, but with cylindrical holes drilled parallel to the fiber axis. Such
“holey” fibers, described in Sec. 10.4, offer a number of salutary features not present
in ordinary optical fibers. A cavity burrowed in a photonic crystal may function as an
optical resonator since it has perfectly reflecting walls at frequencies within the pho-
tonic bandgap. Photonic-crystal microresonators and lasers will be described briefly in
Secs. 11.4D and 18.5C, respectively.
7.4 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA
A. Matrix Theory of Multilayer Optics
A plane wave normally incident on a layered medium undergoes reflections and trans-
missions at the layer boundaries, which in turn undergo their own reflections and
transmissions in an unending process, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1-1(a). The complex am-
plitudes of the transmitted and reflected waves may be determined by use of the Fresnel
equations at each boundary (see Sec. 6.2); the overall transmittance and reflectance of
the medium can, in principle, be calculated by superposition of these individual waves.
This technique was used in Sec. 2.5B to determine the transmittance of the Fabry—Perot
interferometer.
м => ie ° ave at the boundaries of а
] multilayered medium. (5) In each layer,
the forward waves are lumped into a
— 5 forward collected wave ИС) while the
и backward waves are lumped into а back-
= = ward collected wave (С).
— —
Uy
When the number of layers is large, tracking the infinite number of “micro” re-
flections and transmissions can be tedious. An alternative “macro” approach is based
on the recognition that within each layer there are two types of waves: forward waves
traveling to the right, and backward waves traveling to the left. The sums of these waves
add up to a single forward collected wave U‘*) and a single backward collected wave
U) at any point, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1-1(b). Determining the wave propagation ina
layered medium is then equivalent to determining the amplitudes of this pair of waves
everywhere. The complex amplitudes of the four waves on the two sides of a boundary
may be related by imposing the appropriate boundary conditions, or by simply using
the Fresnel equations of reflection and transmission.
Wave-Transfer Matrix
Tracking the complex amplitudes of the forward and backward waves through the
boundaries of a multilayered medium is facilitated by use of matrix methods. Consider
two arbitrary planes within a given optical system, denoted plane 1 and plane 2. The
amplitudes of the forward and backward collected waves at plane 1, ul) and uM,

7.1 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA = 259
respectively, are represented by a column matrix of dimension 2, and similarly for
plane 2. These two column matrices are related by the matrix equation

и® US”
(+) +
us? | [А В] fu?
Olle р (—)|- (7.1-1)
uO US? U3 U;
The matrix M, whose elements are A, B, C, and D, is called the wave-transfer matrix
(or transmission matrix). It depends on the optical properties of the layered medium
between the two planes.

A multilayered medium is conveniently divided into a concatenation of basic el-
ements described by known wave-transfer matrices, say M,, Мь,..., My. The am-
plitudes of the forward and backward collected waves at the two ends of the overall
medium are then related by a single matrix that is the matrix product

IS} м Sl мм =
НЯ НН“ ммм, = 92
where the elements 1,2,..., N are numbered from left to right as shown in the figure.
The wave-transfer matrix cascade formula provided in (7.1-2) is identical to the ray-
transfer matrix cascade formula given in (1.4-10), and it proves equally useful.
Scattering Matrix
An alternative to the wave-transfer matrix that relates the four complex amplitudes
ui) at the two edges of a layered medium is the scattering matrix, or S matrix. It is
often used to describe transmission lines, microwave circuits, and scattering systems.
In this case, the outgoing waves are expressed in terms of the incoming waves,
и® Us”

us) 112 Tai ul)
us и U; T12 tar} [UZ
where the elements of the S matrix are denoted ty9, тот, T12, and %21. Unlike the wave-
transfer matrix, these elements have direct physical significance. The quantities +12 and
т12 are the forward amplitude transmittance and reflectance (i.e., the transmittance and
reflectance of a wave incident from the left), respectively, while +21 and ro; are the
amplitude transmittance and reflectance in the backward direction (1.е., a wave coming
from the right), respectively. The subscript 12, for example, signifies that the light is
incident from medium | into medium 2. This can be easily verified by noting that if
there is no backward wave at plane 2, so that ul? = 0, we obtain ul? = ti uM) and
ul) = TU, Similarly, if there is no forward wave at plane 1, so that uM) = 0,
we obtain us) = TUS” and uO) = tS”.

A distinct advantage of the S-matrix formalism is that its elements are directly
related to the physical parameters of the system. On the other hand, a disadvantage
is that the S matrix of a cascade of elements is not the product of the S matrices of the
constituent elements. A useful systematic procedure for analyzing a cascaded system

260 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
therefore draws on both the wave-transfer and scattering matrix approaches: we use
the handy multiplication formula of the M matrices and then convert to the S matrix to
determine the overall transmittance and reflectance of the cascaded system.
EXAMPLE 7.1-1. Propagation Through a Homogeneous Medium. For a homogeneous
layer of width d and refractive index n, the complex amplitudes of the collected waves at the planes
indicated by the arrows are related by US*) = e~3¢U\ and ИГ) = e-3?UL”, where ф = nko,
so that in this case the wave-transfer matrix and the scattering matrix are:
1 1
= г = exp(—jy) 0 exp(—jy) 0
м- | ; | s-| . | ф = пКь 4.
0 exp) 0 exp(—Jy)
(7.1-4)
ка
Relation between Scattering Matrix and Wave-Transfer Matrix
The elements of the M and S matrices are related by manipulating the defining equa-
tions (7.1-1) and (7.1-3), whereupon the following conversion equations emerge:
А В 1 [41221 — Ter т
М = — + |211 - Тата Та (7.1-5)
со 121 —Т12 1
tio т 1 [AD—BC В
$= | Ty 5. (7.1-6)
Ti2 tar D —С 1 Matrix
Conversion
Relations
These equations are not valid in the limiting cases when +21 = 0 or D = 0.
Summary
Matrix wave optics offers a systematic procedure for determining the amplitude
transmittance and reflectance of a stack of dielectric layers with prescribed thick-
nesses and refractive indices:
и The stack is divided into a cascade of elements encompassing boundaries with
homogeneous layers between them.
= The M matrix is determined for each element. This may be achieved by using
the Fresnel formulas for transmission and reflection to determine its S matrix,
and then using the conversion relation (7.1-5) to calculate the corresponding M
matrix.
= The M matrix for the full stack of elements is obtained by simply multiplying
the M matrices for the individual elements, in accordance with the wave-transfer
matrix formula provided in (7.1-2).
= Finally, the $ matrix for the full stack is determined by conversion from the
overall M matrix via (7.1-6). The elements of the S matrix then directly yield
the amplitude transmittance and reflectance for the full stack of dielectric layers.

7.1 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA 261
Two Cascaded Systems: Airy Formulas
Matrix methods may be used to derive explicit expressions for elements of the scatter-
ing matrix of a composite system in terms of elements of the scattering matrices of the
constituent systems. Consider a wave transmitted through a system described by an S
matrix with elements ty, T21, T12, and t21, followed by another system with S matrix
elements to3, T32, Тоз, and &з2. By multiplying the two associated М matrices, and then
converting the result to an S matrix, the following formulas for the overall forward
transmittance and reflectance can be derived:
{12623 {12121123
=, ТЕТ (7.1-7)
1 — T2117 93 1 — т21т23
If the two cascaded systems are mediated by propagation through a homogeneous
medium, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1-2, then by use of the wave-transfer matrix in (7.1-
4), with the phase ф = nk od, where d is the propagation distance and п is the
refractive index of the medium, the following formulas for the overall transmittance
and reflectance, known as the Airy formulas, may be derived:
{12423 ехр(-7 teteiT23 exp (—72
Из = trates exp(J9) T13 = T12 + Aratertas exp (329) (7.1-8)
1- T91T23 ехр (—j2y) 1- T21T23 EXP (—j2p) Airy
Formulas
ti2 Tar 63 132
Ti by [23 82
. а .
: y й |
= Figure 7.1-2 Transmission of a
Ur EE и, plane wave through а cascade of
|
U; us? | |
The Airy formulas may also be derived by tracking the multiple transmissions and
reflections experienced by an incident wave between the two systems and adding up
their amplitudes, as portrayed in Fig. 7.1-2. A plane wave of complex amplitude U;
incident on the first system produces an initial internal wave of amplitude uM) =
4120;, which reflects back and forth between the two subsystems producing additional
internal waves U- CO) ul), ..., all traveling in the forward direction. The amplitude
of the overall transmitted wave U; is related to the total internal amplitude (С =
uM + ul) +... by И = to3exp(—j¢) U), where ф = nkod. The overall
amplitude transmittance is therefore 13 = U;/U; = 112653 exp(—j¢)(UM /U).
Since UH) = Ud +В...) = UOT —h), where h = r21T23 exp(—j2¢)
is the round-trip multiplication factor, the overall amplitude transmittance +13 yields
the Airy formula in (7.1-8).
Conservation Relations for Lossless Media
If the medium between planes | and 2 is nonlossy, then the incoming and outgoing
optical powers must be equal. Furthermore, if the media at the input and output planes
have the same impedance and refractive index, then these powers are represented by

262 CHAPTER7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
the squared magnitudes of the complex amplitudes |U- & р. In this case, conservation
of power dictates that JU? р + jus? |’ = Jus? |? + JU? |? for any combination of
incoming amplitudes. By choosing the incoming amplitudes U- CO) and us) to be (1,0),
(0,1), and (1,1), the conservation formula above yields three equations that relate the
elements of the S matrix. These equations can be used to prove the following formulas:
[tio] = [65| = |4,  |т12| =|ral = |", |+ =1, (7.1-9)
92/1 = —T12/T- (7.1-10)
Equations (7.1-9) relate the magnitudes of the elements of the S matrix for lossless
media whose input and output planes see the same refractive index, whereas (7.1-10)
relates their arguments.
The formulas in (7.1-9) and (7.1-10) translate to the following relations among the
elements of the M matrix:
ID|=|A], |< =18 JA’ — |B)? =1, (7.1-11)
These results can be derived by substituting the conservation relations for lossless
media, (7.1-9) and (7.1-10), into the conversion relations between the wave-transfer
and scattering matrices, (7.1-5) and (7.1-6).
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 7.1-2. Single Dielectric Boundary. Consider a system comprising а single
boundary. In accordance with the Fresnel equations (Sec. 6.2), the transmittance and reflectance at a
boundary between two media of refractive indices п and nz are governed by the S matrix
S = | | Ето т | , (7.1-13)
Т12 tar Ny + Ng [Ny — Ng 2ng
Substituting (7.1-13) into (7.1-5) yields the M matrix
212 [п-т Notny
Lossless Symmetric Systems
For lossless systems with reciprocal symmetry, namely systems whose transmis-
sion/reflection in the forward and backward directions are identical, we have ty; =
tig =tand то1 = т12 = т. In this case, (7.1-9) and (7.1-10) yield
It? + |r? =1, t/r=—(t/r)*, arg{r} —arg{t} = +7/2, (7.1-15)
indicating that the phases associated with transmission and reflection differ by 7/2.
Under these conditions, the elements of the M matrix satisfy the following relations:
A=D*, B=C*, |A?—|B/P?=1, detM=1. (7.1-16)

7.1 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA 263
The S and M matrices then take the simple form
фт 1 r/t
$ = | i ‚ M= in vr ; (7.1-17)
т г"/ / Lossless Symmetric System
and the system is described by two complex numbers + and т, related by (7.1-15).
Only relative phases are significant in such systems, so we may assume without loss
of generality that arg{t} = 0. It then follows from (7.1-15) that arg{r} = +7/2 so
that r = +7 т|, whereupon the matrices in (7.1-17) take the simpler forms
{| 7т 1 1 |r
s-| I Л |. m= ad IF 2 + |r|? = 1. (7.1-18)
т [tl It} [-Jlr| 1
These equations are commonly used to describe lossless symmetric systems such as
beamsplitters (e.g., cube and pellicle beamsplitters) and integrated-optic couplers.
Moreover, if the system is balanced, 1.е., if |r| = |t| = var We have $ = A Ё i].
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 7.1-3. Dielectric Slab. Consider a lossless symmetric system comprising а саз-
cade of three subsystems: a boundary between media of refractive indices п: and no, followed by
travel through a medium of index ng, followed in turn by a boundary between media with indices n2
and n,. By virtue of the results provided in (7.1-2) and Example 7.1-2, the overall М matrix is then
a product of the three constituent M matrices, with the matrix multiplication taking place in reverse
order:
ny т a
1 Nytn. тш-п2||е № 09| ne-n
р М 1 2 1 2 2 1 2 1 . @.1-19)
Anne ny — П2 та + Ng 0 el? ng — т па + ny
| а—
Here р = п>Коа where d is the width of the slab. The elements of this matrix М, which are given by
A=D'=+=—— (пе — (ng — па)? e?*] (7.1-20)
t* 4nin2 ?
2_ 2
Baca = ще, (7.1-21)
t Anne
satisfy the properties of a lossless symmetric system, as described by (7.1-16). Expressions for t and
т are determined directly from (7.1-20) and (7.1-21):
Ani nz exp(—jy) E -т.
t= ——_ eae ae тен sing 4 7.1-22
(ny + 2)? — (п: — n2)? exp(—j2y) J Ann ы ( )
The intensity transmittance |t|, and the intensity reflectance |r|? = 1—|t|?, are periodic functions
of the phase ф, with period т. The magnitude of the phase difference between т and t is always
maintained at 7/2, regardless of the value of р, but its sign changes as sin p switches its sign every
п interval. It is worthy of note that the expressions provided in (7.1-20) and (7.1-21) can also be
directly derived by regarding the system as a combination of two boundaries mediated by propagation
through a distance in a medium, and using the Airy formula (7.1-8) with tig = 132 = 2 /(п1 +72),
421 = 453 = 212/(п1 + п2), and то = 132 = —Ta1 = —T23 = (па — N2)/(M1 + п2).
ПИ

264 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
сс Е
EXERCISE 7.1-1
Quarter-Wave Film as an Antireflection Coating. Specially designed thin dielectric films
are often used to reduce or eliminate reflection at the boundary between two media of different
refractive indices. Consider a thin film of refractive index nz and thickness 4 sandwiched between
media of refractive indices n; and n3. Derive an expression for the В element of the М matrix for
this multilayer medium. Show that light incident from medium 1 has zero reflectance if d = \/4 and
ng = ,/ning, where А = A, /Nn2.
ny —
_» ng = /nyng
d=A/4
A r Figure 7.1-3  Antireflection coating.
ТТТ
Off-Axis Waves т Layered Media
When an oblique wave is incident on a layered medium, the transmitted and reflected
waves, along with their reflections and transmissions in turn, bounce back and forth
between the layers, as illustrated by its real part as shown in Fig. 7.1-4(a). The laws of
reflection and refraction ensure that, within the same layer, all of the forward waves are
parallel, and all of the backward waves are parallel. Moreover, within any given layer
the forward and backward waves travel at the same angle, when measured from the +z
and —z directions, respectively.
=_ И . . 7 aes _ >
(а) ==. ——— , Figure 7.1-4 (a) Reflections of
a ——— a single incident oblique wave at
the boundaries of a multilayered
medium. (b) In each layer, the
forward waves are lumped into a
№ collected forward wave while the
—_ = backward waves are lumped into а
(db) collected backward wave.
aa =e
Uz

The “macro” approach that was used earlier for normally incident waves is simi-
larly applicable for oblique waves. The distinction is that the Fresnel transmittances
and reflectances at a boundary, +12, T21, Tig, and +21, are angle-dependent as well as
polarization-dependent (see Sec. 6.2).

The simplest example is propagation a distance d through a homogeneous medium
of refractive index п, at an angle 09 measured from the z axis. The wave-transfer
matrix М is then given by (7.1-4), where the phase is now ф = nkod cos 0. Two other
examples are presented below.
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 7.1-4. Single Boundary: Oblique TE Wave. А wave transmitted through a
planar boundary between media of refractive indices n; and п2 at angles 91 and 95, satisfying Snell’s

7.1 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA 265
law (пл sin 6; = nz sin 95), is described by an $ matrix determined from the Fresnel equations (6.2-8)
and (6.2-9), and its corresponding M matrix:
т t т. 1 2а12101 12-й
$ = р и == Ё e с 2 м ; (7.1-23)
Ti2 №1 Ny +72 [1-12 2agiNe
01
91
А В т [+42 5-й
м = = —_ 4 2 м (7.1-24)
С р 2а21й2 ng — т Ny + ng
These expressions are applicable for both TE and TM polarized waves with the following definitions:
TE: ny = nN, COS 91, Ne = 72 COS 95, 12 = а21 = 1,
ТМ: 71 =n 3ес01, П> = п25ес02, а12 = cos 01 / cos 95 = 1/алл.
EXAMPLE 7.1-5. Dielectric Slab: Off-Axis Wave. We now consider an oblique wave trav-
eling through the system described in Example 7.1-3: a slab of thickness d and refractive index nz in
a medium of refractive index пл. The wave-transfer matrix for an oblique wave is a generalization of
the on-axis result:
т т
т [+2 м - 2] е® 0 |fmtnm 12-й
— м [12 то |2 +7 Ma т ‚ 9.1.25)
- 7 91 Anne [my —N2 т +12|| 0 е $ | [п2—п1 Not

1
where © = п2Коа cos 62, and, as in Example 7.1-4, 2; = п1 cos, and Nz = п cos 05 for the TE
polarization, and #1 = п зес 91 and Nz = nz sec 95 for the TM polarization.

The expression for the matrix M in (7.1-25) is identical to that provided in (7.1-19), which
describes the on-axis system, except that the parameters n1, n2, and y are replaced by the angle-
and polarization-dependent parameters 7; and 72, and by the angle-dependent parameter $, respec-
tively. Note that the factors а12 and а21, which appear in (7.1-24) at each boundary, cancel out
since а12а21 = 1. With these substitutions, the expressions developed in (7.1-22) for the on-axis
transmittance and reflectance in Example 7.1-3 generalize to the following off-axis, polarization-
dependent formulas:

= а, Os TS >> Sin t. 7.1-26)

(ny 72)? — (M1 — 72)? exp(—j2¢) J Anne ы (

ПИ
В. Fabry-Perot Etalon
The Fabry-Perot etalon was introduced in Sec. 2.5B; it is an interferometer comprising
two parallel and highly reflective mirrors that transmit light only at a set of specific,
uniformly spaced frequencies, which depend on the optical pathlength between the
mirrors. It is used both as a filter and as a spectrum analyzer, and is controlled by
varying the pathlength, e.g., by moving one of the mirrors with respect to the other.
It is also used as an optical resonator, as discussed in Sec. 11.1. In this section, we
examine this multilayer device using the matrix methods developed in this chapter.

266 CHAPTER7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
Mirror Fabry-Perot Etalon
Consider two lossless partially reflective mirrors with amplitude transmittances t; and
+2, and amplitude reflectances т: and т2, separated by a distance d filled with a medium
of refractive index n. The overall system is described by the matrix product
1/tt 4, /t —7 0 1/45 т2/%
М — | / 1 i/ i nr 74) , / 2 2/ 1 , (7.1-27)
м/и Ин 0 exp(Jy)] [12/6 Ив
where ф = nk,d. Since the system is lossless and symmetric, М takes the simplified
form provided in (7.1-17) and the amplitude transmittance t is therefore the inverse of
the D element of M, so that
tit —7
+= — titexp(-Je) ; (7.1-28)
1 — тато exp (—j2y)
This relation may also be derived by direct use of the Airy formula (7.1-8).
As a result, the intensity transmittance of the etalon is
вы?
= |4? = ЕТ (7.1-29)
ЧП птоехрСРВ
This expression is similar to (2.5-16) for the intensity of an infinite number of waves
with equal phase differences, and with amplitudes that decrease at a geometric rate, as
described in Sec. 2.5B. Assuming that arg{r,;T2} = 0, (7.1-29) can be written in the
form’
и]
А, 7.1-30
1+ (2F/7)? эт? ф
where
4152 1 = т: 2) (1 — |re|?
2-м = (|) [ra ) (7.131)
(1 = [тат] (1 — |riro|)
and
/|rit
g ПУ Intel (7.1-32)
1 [тит] Finesse
The parameter J, called the finesse, is a monotonic increasing function of the re-
flectance product т1т2, and is a measure of the quality of the etalon. For example, if
т1Т2 = 0.99, then F = 313.

As described in Sec. 2.5B, the transmittance J is a periodic function of фр, now with
period т. It reaches its maximum value of ‘нах, Which equals unity if |r, | = |r2|, when
ф is an integer multiple of 7. When the finesse $ is large (1.е., when |т1т2| = 1), T
becomes a sharply peaked function of ‹ф of approximate width 7/F. Thus, the higher
the finesse J, the sharper the peaks of the transmittance as a function of the phase y.

t Equation (7.1-30), in which ф = nkod, reproduces (2.5-18), in which y = 2nkod.

7.1 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA = 267

The phase ф = nk,d = (w/c)d is proportional to the frequency, so that the
condition ф = п corresponds to w = wp, or y = vp, where

реб, wera < (7.1-33)
2d d Free Spectral Range
is called the free spectral range. It follows that the transmittance as a function of
frequency, J(v), is a periodic function of period vp,
T,
Tv) = sa (7.1-34)
1+ (2F/m)? sin? (rv /vp) Transmittance
(Fabry—Perot Etalon)
as illustrated in Fig. 7.1-5. It reaches its peak value of Tmax at the resonance frequencies
Vq = Чик, where 4 is an integer. When the finesse F >> 1, T(v) drops sharply as
the frequency deviates slightly from vz, so that (и) takes the form of a comb-like
function. The spectral width of each of these high-transmittance lines is
VF
би = —_, 7.1-35
F ( )
1.е., is a factor of F smaller than the spacing between the resonance frequencies.
АТ Lt ove т Nt
<—d АМ wt He
в - в и
Figure 7.1-5 Intensity transmittance and reflectance, J and R = 1 — J, of the Fabry—Perot etalon
as a function of frequency v.

The Fabry—Perot etalon may be used as a sharply tuned optical filter or a spectrum
analyzer. Because of the periodic nature of the spectral response, however, the spectral
width of the measured light must be narrower than the free spectral range vp = c/2d in
order to avoid ambiguity. The filter is tuned (1.е., the resonance frequencies are shifted)
by adjusting the distance d between the mirrors. A slight change in mirror spacing
Ad shifts the resonance frequency vg = qc/2d by a relatively large amount Avy =
—(qce/2d?)Ad = —v, Ad/d. Although the frequency spacing vp also changes, it is
by the far smaller amount —vyAd/d. As an example, а mirror separation of d =
1.5 cm leads to a free spectral range иг = 10 GHz when n = 1. For a typical optical
frequency of vy = 104 Hz, corresponding to g = 10%, a change of d by a factor of
10-4 (Ad = 1.5 ym) translates the peak frequency by Av, = 10 GHz, whereas the
free spectral range is altered by only 1 MHz, becoming 9.999 GHz.

Applications of the Fabry—Perot etalon as a resonator are described in Sec. 11.1.

268 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
Off-Axis Transmittance of the Fabry-Perot Etalon
For an oblique wave traveling at an angle 9 with the axis of a mirror etalon, the ampli-
tude transmittance is given by (7.1-28) with the phase y replaced by © = nkod cos 0.
It follows that the intensity transmittance in (7.1-34) is generalized to
Tmax
Tv) = —— >? (7.1-36)
() 1 + (2F/m)? sin? (т cos 0 v/vp)
in the off-axis case.
Maximum transmittance occurs at frequencies for which
и = дик зесб, а=1,2,..., vp =c/2d. (7.1-37)
Resonance
Condition
If the finesse of the etalon is large, transmission occurs at these frequencies and is
almost completely blocked at all other frequencies. The plot of this relation provided
in Fig. 7.1-6(c) shows that at each angle 9 only a set of discrete frequencies are
transmitted. Likewise, a wave at frequency и is transmitted at only a set of angles,
so that a cone of incident broad-spectrum (white) light creates a set of concentric rings
spread like a rainbow, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1-6(b). For incident light with a spectral
width smaller than the free spectral range vr, each frequency component corresponds
to one and only one angle, so that the etalon can be used as a spectrum analyzer.
о
—аЕ- 40°
_ а 60"
ee 50°
—— 4 9. 40°
9 20°
10°
0°
_>| d k— 0 1 2 3 4 5
(а) () ©) vive
Figure 7.1-6 (a) An off-axis wave transmitted through a mirror Fabry-Perot etalon. (b) White
light from a point source transmitted through the etalon creates a set of concentric rings of different
frequencies (colors). (c) Frequencies and angles that satisfy the condition of peak transmittance, as
set forth in (7.1-37).
EXAMPLE 7.1-6. The Dielectric-Slab Beamsplitter. The transmittance and reflectance of
a dielectric slab of width d and refractive index п> surrounded by a medium of refractive index пл
are given in (7.1-26). If the wave is incident at an angle 6,, then for TE polarization we have n, =
пл COS 61, Ne = п2 COs 95, and ф = naked cos 65, as in Example 7.1-4, with sin 65 = (ni /п2) sin 41.
This expression reproduces (7.1-28) for the Fabry—Perot etalon if we substitute 114 = 47112 /(п1 +
Mz) and rT, = (1 — #2)? /(й, + N2)?. It follows that the expressions for the intensity transmittance
of the mirror etalon, (7.1-30) and (7.1-34), are also applicable for the dielectric slab. Using (7.1-32),
the finesse of the slab is thus given by
52 _ ~2
g = ВИ. (7.1-38)
4 И

7.1 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA 269
Large values of F are typically not obtained in slab etalons. As an example, for n; = 1.5 (the
refractive index of SiO2) and 7> = 3.5 (the refractive index of Si), and an angle of incidence 6; =
45°, the finesse У = 1.89. As illustrated in Fig. 7.1-7, the dependence of J and R on the phase $,
which is proportional to the frequency, does not exhibit the sharp peaks observed in etalons with
highly reflective mirrors (see, e.g., the illustration in Fig. 7.1-5). Higher values of F are obtained by
coating the surfaces of the slab to enhance internal reflection.

The dielectric slab may be used as a beamsplitter. If the slab width d = 1 mm, for example,
the range between two consecutive transmittance peaks Ф = nok ,dcos62 = л corresponds to a
frequency of = 45 GHz. As illustrated in Fig. 7.1-7, the transmittance and reflectance near the center
of this interval are reasonably flat. Since beamsplitters are routinely used in interferometers, it is
important to be cognizant of the relation between the phases of the reflected and transmitted waves.
As illustrated in the figure, the relative phase between the reflected and transmitted waves is always
+7 /2, with the sign changing at points of peak transmittance.

Г
' T
‘yd
aN aa os R

AWA “ ° / `, / \ / \

Os. KL 7 \ / \ / \ /

0 aan t 0 (ат qn (tq) ©

(< о
(а) г.
—п/2
Figure 7.1-7 (а) A dielectric slab used as a beamsplitter. (5) Dependence of the intensity
transmittance and reflectance (J and &, respectively) on the phase @ = n2k,d cos 62 for па = 1.5
(refractive index of $105), n2 = 3.5 (refractive index of Si), and an angle of incidence 0, = 45°.
Transmission peaks and reflectance minima occur at ф = дл, where 4 is an integer. (с) The relative
phase between the reflected and transmitted waves is --7/2; the sign switches at @ = ал.
ини |
С. Bragg Grating
The Bragg grating was introduced in Exercise 2.5-3 as a set of uniformly spaced
parallel partially reflective planar mirrors. Such a structure has angular and frequency
selectivity that is useful in many applications. In this section, we generalize the defini-
tion of the Bragg grating to include a set of N uniformly spaced identical multilayer
segments, and develop a theory for light reflection based on matrix wave optics. De-
vices fabricated according to this prescription include distributed Bragg reflectors
(DBRs) and fiber Bragg gratings (FBGs), which are often used in resonators and
lasers.
Simplified Theory
The reflectance of the Bragg grating was determined in Exercise 2.5-3 under two
assumptions: (1) the mirrors are weakly reflective so that the incident wave is not
depleted as it propagates; and (2) secondary reflections (i.e., reflections of the reflected
waves) are negligible. In this approximation, the reflectance Ry of an N-mirror grating
is related to the reflectance Х of a single mirror by the relation’
sin? Мф
sin*y

{| In Exercise 2.5-3, the quantity ф denotes the phase between successive phasors whereas here that phase is

denoted 2y since it represents a round trip.

270 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS

As described in Sec. 2.5B, the factor sin? № фФ/ sin? ‹ф represents the intensity of the
sum of М phasors of unit amplitude and phase difference 2ф. This function has a peak
value of №? when the Bragg condition is satisfied, 1.е., when 2y equals g27, where
q = 0,1,2,.... It drops away from these values sharply, with a width that is inversely
proportional to NV. In this simplified model, the intensity of the total reflected wave is,
at most, a factor of N? greater than the intensity of the wave reflected from a single
segment.

For a Bragg grating comprising partially reflective mirrors separated from each
other by a distance A and a round-trip phase 2ф = 2КЛ соз 6, where @ is the angle
of incidence. Therefore, maximum reflection occurs when 2kA cos 6 = 2q7 or

cos = qa = 4-3. —=9-8, (7.1-40)
2A Ww и Bragg Condition
where
ив, шв, (7.1-41)
2А А Bragg Frequency
is the Bragg frequency.
д” —{}—A
80°
9 Zz
60°
50°
40°
30° Figure 7.1-8 Locus of frequencies и and angles 9
20° at which the Bragg condition is satisfied. For example,
10° / if = 1.5 ив (dot-dash line), we have 6 = 48.2°. This
5 corresponds to a Bragg angle 03 = 41.8° (measured
° 0 1 2 3 4 5 Ив from the plane of the grating.)

At normal incidence (9 = 0°), peak reflectance occurs at frequencies that are integer
multiples of the Bragg frequency, i.e., и = див. At frequencies such that v < ив, the
Bragg condition cannot be satisfied at any angle. At frequencies ив < и < 2%,
the Bragg condition is satisfied at one angle 9 = cos-!(\/2A) = соз (изв /м). The
complement of this angle, 03 = 7/2 — 0, is the Bragg angle (see (2.5-13) and Fig. 2.5-
8),

63 = sin~'(A/2A). (7.1-42)

Bragg Angle

At frequencies и > 2ив, the Bragg condition is satisfied at more than one angle.

Figure 7.1-8 illustrates the spectral and angular dependence of reflections from a Bragg
grating, based on the simplified theory.

7.1 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED МЕГА 271
Matrix Theory
We now use the matrix approach introduced in the previous section to develop an
exact theory of Bragg reflection that includes multiple transmissions and reflections,
as well as depletion of the incident wave. It turns out that the collaborative effects
of the reflections, and the reflections of reflections, can lead to enhancement of the
total reflected wave, and a phenomenon whereby total reflection occurs not only at
single frequencies that are multiples of ив / соз0, but over extended spectral bands
surrounding these frequencies!

Consider a grating comprising a stack of N identical generic segments (Fig. 7.1-9),
each described by a unimodular wave-transfer matrix M, satisfying the conservation
relations for a lossless, symmetrical system, so that

1/t* r/t
M, = 71-43

where t and r are complex amplitude transmittance and reflectance satisfying the
conditions set forth in (7.1-15), and J = |t|? and R = |r|? are the corresponding
intensity transmittance and reflectance.

Мо Мо

1 2 N-1 N

Figure 7.1-9 Bragg grating made of № segments, each of which is described by a matrix Мо.
In accordance with (7.1-2), the wave-transfer matrix М for the NV segments is simply
the product M = MX . Since Мо is unimodular, 1.е., det М. = 1, it satisfies the property
М = UM, — Ул, (7.1-44)
where
sin N®
sin ®
cos ® = Re{1/t}, (7.1-46)
and I is the identity matrix. Equation (7.1-44) may be proved by induction (1.е., demon-
strating that this relation is valid for № segments if it is valid for № — 1 segments; this
may be done by direct substitution with the help of trigonometric identities).

Since the N-segment system is also lossless and symmetric, its matrix may be

written in the form
1/t) Tr /t
My = и N м/ ‘| ; (7.1-47)
TN / t N 1 / tn

272 — CHAPTER7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
where ty and тм are the N-segment amplitude transmittance and reflectance, ге-
spectively. Substituting from (7.1-43) and (7.1-47) into (7.1-44), and comparing the
diagonal and off-diagonal elements of the matrices on both sides of the equation, leads
to
1 1

— =WVy-—-UVy_} (7.1-48)

tn t

TN т

— =WVy-. 7.1-49

tw Ny ( )
These two equations define ty and ry in terms of t and т.

The intensity transmittance Ту = |t,|? is obtained by taking the absolute-squared

value of (7.1-49) and using the relation R = 1 — J,
TJ

Tn = > 7.1-50
Ра -9Э (7.1-99)

It follows that the power reflectance Ry = 1 — Ty is given by

WR

Ry = —_—*~___.. (7.1-51)
1-Х-+ UVR Bragg-Grating
Reflectance

Summary

The reflectance Ry of a medium comprising № identical segments is related to the

single-segment reflectance ® by the nonlinear relation (7.1-51), which contains

a factor Vj that results from the interference effects associated with collective

reflections from the VV segments of the grating. Defined by (7.1-45), Фу depends

on the number of segments NV and on an additional parameter Ф that is related to

the single-segment complex amplitude transmittance t via (7.1-46).

The dependence of Ry on &, described by (7.1-51), takes simpler forms in certain
limits. If the single-segment reflectance is very small, 1.е., R < 1, and if Ф\, is not too
large so that 4, Х < 1, then (7.1-51) may be approximated by:

a)
N®
Ry & WR = TR. (7.1-52)
sin* ®
This relation is now similar in form to the approximate relation (7.1-39), with ® playing
the role of the phase y.

In the opposite limit for which $5, > 1, the reflectance Ry = W2,R/(1 + WAR).
This nonlinear relation between Ry and Х exhibits saturation and is typical of systems
with feedback, which in this case results from multiple internal reflections at the seg-
ment boundaries. Ultimately, if WAR >> 1, then Ry approaches its maximum value
of unity, so that the N-segment device acts as perfect mirror even though the single
segment is only partially reflective. A large interference factor Vy accelerates the rise
of Ry to unity as Х increases.

The interference factor Фу, which depends on Ф = cos~!(Re{1/t}) via (7.1-45),
has two distinct regimes: (1) a normal regime for which Ф is real and the grating ex-
hibits partial reflection/transmission (including zero reflection, or total transmission);

714 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED MEDIA 273
and (2) an anomalous regime for which ® is complex and Vy can be extremely large,
corresponding to total reflection.

Partial- and Zero-Reflection Regime

This regime is defined by the condition |Re{1/t}| < 1, which ensures that Ф =
cos~'(Re{1/t}) is real. In this case, Ry depends on R and Ф м in accordance with
(7.1-45) and (7.1-51). Maximum reflectance occurs when Ф м has its maximum value
of М. In this case, Ry = N?R/(1 —R+ N?R). Therefore, Ry cannot exactly equal
unity unless Х = 1, exactly. For example, for № = 10, if R = 0.5, then the maximum
value of Ry = 0.99.

Zero reflectance, or total transmittance, is possible, even if the reflectance R of the
individual segment is substantial. This occurs when Vy = 0, 1.е., when sin МФ = 0,
or ® = qr/N for = 0,1,..., N—1. The N frequencies at which this complete trans-
parency occurs are resonance frequencies of the grating. The phenomenon represents
some form of tunneling through the individually reflective segments.
Total-Reflection Regime
In this regime, | Re{1/t}| = |cos ®| > 1 so that ® is a complex variable ® = ®p +
j®,. Using the identity соз(Фв + j®:) = созФв cosh ®; — j sin Фв sinh Фу, and
equating the real and imaginary parts of both sides of (7.1-46), we obtain sin Фв = 0
so that PR = maz and созФв = +1, or —1, when m is an even or odd integer,
respectively, which results in

cosh ®; = | Re{1/t}]. (7.1-53)
Total-Reflection Regime
The factor Vy = sin N®/ sin ® then becomes
sinh N®

ФЕИ, (7.1-54)
sinh ®; Total-Reflection Regime
where the + sign is the sign of the factor cos(Nmz) / cos(mz). Since sinh(-) increases
exponentially with N for large №, |Фу| can be much greater than №. In this case,
in accordance with (7.1-51), the reflectance Ry = 1 and the grating acts as a total
reflector. The forward waves become evanescent and do not penetrate the multisegment

medium, much as occurs with total internal reflection.

Because ® depends on t, which depends on the frequency v, the two regimes

correspond to distinct spectral bands, as illustrated in the following examples. The
spectral bands associated with the total-reflection regime are called stop bands since
they represent bands within which light transmission is almost completely blocked.
The other regime corresponds to passbands. Total transmission (zero reflection) occurs
at specific resonance frequencies within the passbands.
EXAMPLE 7.1-7. Stack of Partially Reflective Mirrors. Consider a grating made of a stack
of N identical partially reflective mirrors (beamsplitters) that are mutually separated by a distance A
and embedded in a homogeneous medium of refractive index n, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1-10(a). A
single segment comprises a distance A in a homogeneous medium, followed by a partially reflective
mirror of amplitude transmittance t and amplitude reflectance r.

274 CHAPTER 7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
The wave-transfer matrix M, for this segment is determined by multiplying the matrix in (7.1-18)
by the matrix in (7.1-4):
1 ese gr ei?
М. = — . . , = пКо А = , 7.1-55
fi Lj we | Я-А = mu т»
where из = c/2A is the Bragg frequency. This provides + = |t|e’”, and therefore ® via
1
cos ® = iq cosy Юг |cosy| < {| (7.1-56)
1
cosh ®; = iq |cosy| for |cosy| > ||. (7.1-57)

The relationships between Ф and y, and between Фут and y, are nonlinear and unusual, as illus-
trated in Fig. 7.1-10(b). The corresponding dependence of the power reflectance Ry on ф is shown in
Fig. 7.1-10(c). In the normal regime (indicated by the shaded regions), Ф is real and the reflectance
exhibits multiple peaks with zeros between. None of the peaks approaches unity, despite the fact that
Wy reaches a maximum value of № = 10.

The situation is quite different in the total-reflection regime (unshaded regions), where ® is
complex. The factor Wy reaches a value == 3000 at the center of the band (ф = т) when |t|? = 0.5.
These regions represent ranges of y where total reflection occurs (Ry = 1). Since ф is proportional
to the frequency v, Fig. 7.1-10(c) is actually a display of the spectral reflectance, and the unshaded
regions correspond to the stop bands.

А п
| ® ®
> 2 5)
a ore ee 7 и № и ^
192 3 s+ N 0 d 1
(а) 0 п 277 ф= пи/ VB
1
« — < faa)
2 [ Е Ё
() Sos 3 5
За 5 В
Е в Я в
0
0 VB 2VB и
Figure 7.1-10 (a) Bragg grating comprising N = 10 identical mirrors, each with a power
reflectance |т|? = 0.5. (5) Dependence of Ф on the inter-mirror phase delay ф = nk, A. Within
the shaded regions, ® is complex and its imaginary part ®; is represented by the dashed curves. (с)
Reflectance ® as a function of frequency (in units of the Bragg frequency из = c/2A) . Within the
stop bands, the reflectance is approximately unity.
EXAMPLE 7.1-8. Dielectric Bragg Grating. A grating is made of N identical dielectric
layers of refractive index nz, each of width 45, buried in a medium of refractive index пл and
separated by a distance dj, as illustrated in Fig. 7.1-11. This multisegment system is a stack of №
identical double layers, each of the type described in Example 7.1-3. The A = 1/t* element of the
wave-transfer matrix M, is given by (7.1-20), from which
1 (ny + ny)? (no —n,)
Re 4 — > = —_——— cos — —— cos(y1 — 7.1-58
e { + } ть со8(+1 + 2) дить “°° (1 ф2), ( )
where фр: = ni kod; and 2 = п2Ко42 are the phases introduced by the two layers of a segment. This
result can be used in conjunction with (7.1-45), (7.1-46), (7.1-51), (7.1-53), and (7.1-54) to determine
the reflectance of the grating.

The spectral dependence of the reflectance can be computed as a function of и by noting that

фа + 92 = ko(nidi + п245) = пи/ив, where из = (c,/n)/2A, and п = (nid + n2d2)/A is

71 OPTICS OF DIELECTRIC LAYERED МЕРА 275
the average refractive index. The Bragg frequency из is the frequency at which the single-segment
round-trip phase 2k,(nid1 + ngd2) = 2m. The phase difference y; — yo = Сли/изв, with С =
(nid, — N2gd2)/(n1d1 + п245), is also proportional to the frequency. Figure 7.1-11(b) provides an
example of the spectral reflectance as a function of v.

Ha mM dy dp A Ha 4 1 _
я
Ф no} Bs}
о я Е
я 3 Е
£05 =. 5
у МЕ | : | | |
= n 3
о т
[7
12 a 0 ив We VR и
Figure 7.1-11 Power reflectance аз a function of frequency for a dielectric Bragg grating
comprising № = 10 segments, each of which has two layers of thickness 41 = dz and refractive
indices ny = 1.5 and ng = 3.5. The grating is placed in a medium with matching refractive index пл.
The reflectance is approximately unity within the stop bands centered about multiples of vz = c/2A,
where с = c,/7 and 7 is the mean refractive index.
EXAMPLE 7.1-9. Dielectric Bragg Grating: Oblique Incidence. The results in Exam-
ple 7.1-8 may be generalized to oblique waves with angle of incidence 91 in medium 1, corresponding
to angle 95 in layer 2, where пл sin 91 = nz sin 05. In this case, (7.1-58) becomes
1 (M1 +72)? о (M2 — п)? о
е { i} Gita cos($1 + $2) ся cos($1 — $2) ( )
where 2, = n kod, cos6; and $5 = п2Ко42 с08 02; Ny = п1с080, and Ng = п2со08 65
for TE polarization; and 7, = п1зес0: and й> = позес05 for TM polarization. This rela-
tion may be used to compute the spectral reflectance at any angle of incidence. Figure 7.1-12
illustrates the dependence of the power reflectance Ry on frequency and the angle of inci-
dence for both TE and TM polarization for a high- contrast grating. The range of angles over
which unity reflectance obtains increases with increasing refractive-index contrast ratio n2/n4.
1
в т be А № ,
ey 0
aaa, ball. Nin ми
ААА all, Mn) IVa,
5 2
0.5
‘hw bl tne Г Мм
1
0 LN АЛ oa —~A NN 69°
i | 1 ro ^
0.5
Ал
0.5
ГОО ОЧ OS Л.
ИА. ПД М”
0.5
0 VR 2B Зив и
Figure 7.1-12 Spectral dependence of the reflectance Х for the 10-segment dielectric Bragg
grating displayed in Fig. 7.1-11, at various angles of incidence 0, and for TE and TM polarizations.
ПОНИ

276 CHAPTER 7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS

Bragg Grating т ап Unmatched Medium

In the previous analysis, the Bragg grating was assumed to be made of N identical
segments. If each segment is made of multiple dielectric layers, this requires that
grating be placed in a matched medium, i.e., a medium with a refractive index equal
to that of the front layer, so that the incident light undergoes no additional reflection
at the front boundary, and reflects at the back boundary as if it were entering another
layer of the grating. The device described in Example 7.1-8 meets this condition.

In most applications, the grating is placed in an unmatched medium, such as air,
and boundary effects must be accounted for. This may be accomplished by writing the
wave-transfer matrix M of the composite system, including all boundaries, and finding
the corresponding scattering matrix $ by use of the conversion relation. The reflectance
of the composite system may be readily determined from S.

If MY is the wave-transfer matrix of an N-segment grating in a medium matched to
the front layer, then the overall wave transfer function takes the form

М = М. МАМ, (7.1-60)
where М; is the wave-transfer matrix of the entrance boundary, and M, is the wave-
transfer matrix of the Nth segment with a boundary into the unmatched medium.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 7.1-10. Reflectance of a Dielectric Bragg Grating т an Unmatched
Medium. An N-segment Bragg grating is made of alternating layers of refractive indices пл
and ng, and widths 41 and 45, placed in a medium of refractive index по. We wish to determine the
reflectance for a wave incident at an angle 4 in the external medium, corresponding to angles 91 and
02 in the first and second layer of each segment, as determined by Snell’s law (пу sin 6; = nz sin 05).

In this case, (7.1-60) may be used with the following wave-transfer matrices: (1) М; represents
a boundary between media of refractive indices по and па, as described in Example 7.1-4; (2)
М. represents a single segment of the grating, as described in Example 7.1-5; (3) М. represents
propagation a distance 41 in a medium with refractive index п, followed by a slab of width d2
and refractive index m2, with boundary into a medium of refractive index то. Once the М matrix is
determined, we use the conversion relation (7.1-6) to determine the corresponding scattering matrix
$. The overall reflectance is the element 712 in (7.1-4).

2

505

= /

Е 0 /\ — | | | 1 | 1 | |

© 1 ии

о | vega! TE TE ТМ ур =0.97-1.18

505 тм

2 0 | | | | | [\ — ae

057

& ols ^^ DNS

0° 10° 20° 30° 40° 50° 60° 70°80" , 90° OF 107 20° 30° 40° 50° 60° 70° 807, 90°
(a) Grating in matched medium (b) Grating in air

Figure 7.1-13 Power reflectance as a function of the angle of incidence 6 at fixed frequencies for
the grating described in Fig. 7.1-11. (a) Grating is placed in a matched medium (n = 71). (b) Grating
is placed in air (n = 1). In air, the grating has unity reflectance at all angles, for both TE and TM
polarizations, at frequencies in the band 0.97vz to 1.18 ив.
ПОНИ

7.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 277
7.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS
One-dimensional (1D) photonic crystals are dielectric structures whose optical prop-
erties vary periodically in one direction, called the axis of periodicity, and are constant
in the orthogonal directions. These structures exhibit unique optical properties, par-
ticularly when the period is of the same order of magnitude as the wavelength. If the
axis of periodicity is taken to be the z direction, then optical parameters such as the
permittivity «(z) and the impermeability n(z) = €,/e(z) are periodic functions of 2,
satisfying
n(z + A) =n(2), (7.2-1)
for all z, where A is the period. Wave propagation in such periodic media may be
studied by solving the generalized Helmholtz equations (7.0-2), for periodic n(z).

For an on-axis wave traveling along the z axis and polarized in the x direction, the
electric and the magnetic field components E,, and H, are functions of z, independent
of x and y, so that (7.0-2) becomes

d d и?
—— —|H, = — Ну. 7.2-2
dz In =| nn ad ( )

For an off-axis wave, i.e., a wave traveling in an arbitrary direction in the x—z plane,
the generalized Helmholtz equation has a more complex form. For example, for a TM-
polarized off-axis wave, the magnetic field points in the y direction and (7.0-2) gives:

6) Г) 92 uw
_— — — »H, = — H,. 7.2-3
4-5 5, | тв ban = 5 В, 72-3)
Note that (7.2-2) and (7.2-3) are cast in the form of an eigenvalue problem from which
the modes H,,(x, =) can be determined.

Before embarking on finding solutions to these eigenvalue problems, we first exam-
ine the conditions imposed on the propagating modes by the translational symmetry
associated with the periodicity.

A. Bloch Modes

Consider first a homogeneous medium, which is invariant to an arbitrary translation of

the coordinate system. For this medium, an optical mode is a wave that is unaltered by

such a translation; it changes only by a multiplicative constant of unity magnitude (a

phase factor). The plane wave exp(—jkz) is such a mode since, upon translation by a

distance d, it becomes exp|—jk(z + d)] = exp(—jkd) exp(—jkz). The phase factor

exp(—jkd) is the eigenvalue of the translation operation, as discussed in Appendix C.

On-Axis Bloch Modes

Consider now a ID periodic medium, which is invariant to translation by the distance

A along the axis of periodicity. Its optical modes are waves that maintain their form

upon such translation, changing only by a phase factor. As explained in Appendix C,

these modes must have the form

Ч

=—— i bl (=) = p«(z) exp(—jK2), (7.2-4)

— Bloch Mode

278 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS

where U represents any of the field components Е», Ву, Hz, or Ну; К is a constant,
and рк(=) is a periodic function of period A. This form satisfies the condition that a
translation A alters the wave by only a phase factor exp(—jKA) since the periodic
function is unaltered by such translation. This optical wave is known as a Bloch mode,
and the parameter K, which specifies the mode and its associated periodic function
px (Z), is called the Bloch wavenumber.

The Bloch mode is thus a plane wave exp(—jKz) with propagation constant K,
modulated by a periodic function p,(z), which has the character of a standing wave, as
illustrated by its real part displayed in Fig. 7.2-1(a). Since a periodic function of period
A can be expanded in a Fourier series as a superposition of harmonic functions of the
form exp(—jmgz),m = 0,+1,+2,..., with

g=2rn/A, (7.2-5)
it follows that the Bloch wave is a superposition of plane waves of multiple spatial
frequencies K +mg. The fundamental spatial frequency g of the periodic structure and
its harmonics mg, added to the Bloch wavenumber K, constitute the spatial spectrum
of the Bloch wave, as shown in Fig. 7.2-1(b). The spatial frequency shift introduced by
the periodic medium is analogous to the temporal frequency (Doppler) shift introduced
by reflection from a moving object.

Standing
A wave Travelin
р ти ИИ UN wave | |
aN oO aN a a и —\ 7 - < K-g K К+8
(a) \ | | \/ | \ | | У | (b) Spatial frequency
Figure 7.2-1 (a) The Bloch mode. (6) Spatial spectrum of the Bloch mode.

Two modes with Bloch wavenumbers К and К’ = К + в are equivalent since
they correspond to the same phase factor, exp(—jK’A) = exp(—jKA) exp(—j27) =
exp(—jKA). This is also evident since the factor exp(—jg z) is itself periodic and can
be lumped with the periodic function p,(z). Therefore, for a complete specification of
all modes, we need only consider values of K in a spatial-frequency interval of width
в = 2n/A. The interval [—g/2, g/2] = [—7/A,7/A], known as the first Brillouin
zone, is a commonly used construct.

Off-Axis Bloch Modes
Off-axis optical modes traveling at some angles in the x—z plane assume the Bloch
form
|
— A U(a, y, 2) = px(z) exp(—jKz) exp(—jk,x). (7.2-6)
Tz Off-Axis
Bloch Mode
The uniformity of the medium in the x direction constrains the x dependence of the
optical mode to the harmonic form exp(—jk,x), posing no other restriction on the
transverse component А» of the wavevector. At a location where the refractive index

72 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 279
is п, К, = nk, sin 0, where @ is the inclination angle of the wave with respect to the
z axis. As the wave travels through the various layers of the inhomogeneous medium,
this angle changes, but in view of Snell’s law, n sin @ and k, are unaltered.
Normal-to-Axis Bloch Modes
When the angle of incidence in the densest medium is greater than the critical angle,
the modes do not travel along the axis of periodicity (the z direction). Rather, they are
normal-to-axis modes traveling along the lateral x direction that take the Bloch form
(7.2-6) with K = 0,

Ч

| a | \ ,

ш- Normal-to-Axis

Bloch Mode

where po(z) is a periodic function representing a standing wave along the axis of
periodicity.
Eigenvalue Problem, Dispersion Relation, and Photonic Bandgaps
Now that we have established the mathematical form of the modes, as imposed by the
translational symmetry of the periodic medium, the next step is to solve the eigenvalue
problem described by the generalized Helmholtz equation. For a mode with a Bloch
wavenumber К, the eigenvalues w/c? provide a discrete set of frequencies w. These
values are used to construct the w-K dispersion relation. The eigenfunctions help us
determine the Bloch periodic functions p,(z) for each of the values of w associated
with each K.

The w-K relation is a periodic multivalued function of K with period g, the funda-
mental spatial frequency of the periodic structure; it is often plotted over the Brillouin
zone [—g/2 < К < g/2], as illustrated schematically in Fig. 7.2-2(a). When visualized
as a monotonically increasing function of k, it appears as a continuous function with
discrete jumps at values of K equal to integer multiples of g/2. These discontinuities
correspond to the photonic bandgaps, which are spectral bands not crossed by the
dispersion lines, so that no propagating modes exist.

The origin of the discontinuities in the dispersion relation lies in the special sym-
metry that emerges when k = g/2, i.e., when the period of the medium equals ex-
actly half the period of the traveling wave. Consider the two modes with k = +g/2
and Bloch periodic functions рк(2) = pig/2(z). Since these modes travel with the
same wavenumber, but in opposite directions, i.e. see inverted versions of the medium,
D—g/2(Z) = Dg/2(—~). But these two modes are in fact one and the same, because their
Bloch wavenumbers differ by g. It therefore follows that at the edge of a Brillouin
zone, there are two Bloch periodic functions that are inverted versions of one another.
Since the medium is inhomogeneous or piecewise homogeneous within a unit cell,
these two distinct functions interact with the medium differently, and therefore have
two distinct eigenvalues, 1.е., distinct values of w. This explains the discontinuity that
emerges as the continuous w-K line crosses the boundary of the Brillouin zone. A
similar argument explains the discontinuities that occur when K equals other integer
multiples of g/2.

The variational principle (see Appendix C) is helpful in pointing out certain features
of these eigenfunctions. Based on this principle, the eigenfunctions of a Hermitian op-
erator are orthogonal distributions that minimize the variational energy. The variational
energy associated with the linear operator £ in the eigenvalue equation (7.0-2) is Ey, =
$(H, £H)/(H, H). By use of Maxwell’s equations, it can be shown that (H, £H) =
(H, V x [n(r) V x HJ) = f |D(r)|?/e(r)dr, so that minimization of E,, is achieved

280 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
by distributions for which higher displacement fields D(r) are located at positions of
lower 1/e(r), 1.е. higher refractive index. For example, if the periodic medium is made
of two alternating dielectric layers, as illustrated in Fig. 7.2-2(b), then at a discontinuity
the eigenfunction of the lower frequency concentrates its displacement field in the layer
with the greater refractive index, whereas the eigenfunction of the higher frequency has
an inverted distribution for which the displacement field is concentrated in the layer
with the lower refractive index.
| Brillouin zone | A>
— : Bandgap 2 : | | |
Lea PN =, BS VON
| Bandgap 1 и DN РА <
>. >. и“ А < NY д и
-18 0 Tg g K и =:
Figure 7.2-2 (а) The dispersion relation is a multivalued periodic function with period g = 2” /А
and discontinuities at К equals integer multiples of g/2. (6) Bloch functions at the points A and В at
the edge of the Brillouin zone for an alternating dielectric-layer periodic medium with nz > пл.
The challenging problem now is the solution of the eigenvalue problem associated
with the Helmholtz equation. There are two approaches:
= The first approach is based on expanding the periodic function n(z) of the medium
and the periodic function px(z) of the Bloch mode in Fourier series and con-
verting the Helmholtz differential equation into a set of algebraic equation cast
in the form of a matrix eigenvalue problem, which are solved numerically. This
approach is called the Fourier Optics approach.
= The second approach is applicable to layered (piecewise homogeneous) media
with planar boundaries. Instead of solving the Helmholtz equation, we make
direct use of the laws of propagation and reflection/refraction at boundaries, which
are known consequences of Maxwell’s equations. We then use the matrix methods
developed for multilayer media in Sec. 7.1A and applied to Bragg gratings in Sec.
7.1C. This Matrix Optics approach leads to a 2 x 2 matrix eigenvalue problem
from which the dispersion relation and the Bloch modes are determined.
The matrix-optics approach is discussed next, and the Fourier-optics approach is
examined in Sec. 7.2C.
B. Matrix Optics of Periodic Media
A one-dimensional periodic medium comprises identical segments, called unit cells,
that are repeated periodically along one direction (the z axis) and separated by the
period A (Fig. 7.2-3). Each unit cell contains a succession of lossless dielectric layers
or partially reflective mirrors in some order, forming a symmetric system represented
by a generic unimodular wave-transfer matrix
1/t*  r/t
M, = 7.2-8
where t and т are complex amplitude transmittance and reflectance satisfying the con-
ditions set forth in (7.1-17), and J = |t|? and R = |r|? are the corresponding intensity

7.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 281
transmittance and reflectance. The medium is a Bragg grating, like that described in
Sec. 7.1C, with an infinite number of segments. A wave traveling through the medium
undergoes multiple transmissions and reflections that add up to one forward and one
backward wave at every plane. We now use the matrix method developed in Sec. 7.1A
to determine the Bloch modes.

Ue Une
... | >| >| nae
Я om | Я юны Figure 7.2-3 Wave-transfer ma-
Un Um trix representation of a periodic
medium.
mA (m+1)A <
Ге {0} be the complex amplitudes of the forward and backward waves at the
initial position z = mA of unit cell m. Knowing these amplitudes, the amplitudes
elsewhere within the cell can be determined by straightforward application of the
appropriate wave-transfer matrices, as described in Sec. 7.1. We therefore direct our
attention to the dynamics of the amplitudes {08} as they vary from one cell to the
next. These dynamics are described by the recurrence relations
и) и)
| ©) =M, O , (7.2-9)
On 41 Um
which can be used to determine the amplitudes at a particular cell if the amplitudes at
the previous cell are known.
Eigenvalue Problem and Bloch Modes
By definition, the modes of the periodic medium are self-reproducing waves, for which
ya =e J? i) ‚ m=1,2,...; (7.2-10)
Ont Um
after transmission through a distance A (in this case a unit cell), the magnitudes of
the forward and backward waves remain unchanged and the phases are altered by a
common shift ®, called the Bloch phase. The corresponding Bloch wavenumber is
К = ®/A, so that
Bloch Phase
Determination of the complex amplitudes и) and the phase Ф = K A that satisfy
the self-reproduction condition (7.2-10) can be cast as an eigenvalue problem. This is
accomplished by using (7.2-9) with m = 0 to write (7.2-10) in the form
М, | O =e? , (7.2-12)
Uo Ug

282 CHAPTER7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
This is an eigenvalue problem for the 2 x 2 unit-cell matrix M,. The factor e~/® is the
eigenvalue and the vector with components uM) and ui? is the eigenvector.

The eigenvalues are determined by equating the determinant of the matrix M, —
е ФТ to zero. Noting that |t|?++|r|? = 1, the solution to the ensuing quadratic equation
yields e~7® = $(1/t + 1/t*) + j{1 — [4(1/t + 1/6) } 2 , from which

1
cos ® = Re tf: (7.2-13)
Equation (7.2-13) is identical to (7.1-46) for the Bragg grating. This is gratifying
inasmuch as the periodic medium at hand is an extended Bragg grating with an infinite
number of segments.

Since M, is a 2 x 2 matrix, it has two eigenvalues. Hence, only two of the mul-
tiple solutions of (7.2-13) are independent. Since the cos~!(-) function is even, the
two solutions within the interval [—7, 7] have equal magnitudes and opposite signs.
They correspond to Bloch modes traveling in the forward and backward directions.
Other solutions obtained by adding multiples of 27 are not independent since they are
irrelevant to the phase factor e~/®.

The associated eigenvectors of M, are therefore

uM) r/t
ee a wae (7.2-14)
as can be ascertained by operating on the right-hand side of (7.2-14) with the M,
matrix; the result is again the right-hand side of (7.2-14) to within a constant.

The periodic function px(z) associated with the Bloch wave can be determined by
propagating the amplitudes uo) and uO) through the unit cell. For example, if the
initial layer in the unit cell is a homogeneous medium of refractive index n, and width
d,, then the wave at distance z into this layer is

pK(Z) e 9К* = Селия + (етот, 0<;<а.. (7.2-15)
Using (7.2-14) and (7.2-11), (7.2-15) then provides
pk (z) x [тео 4 (e~IKA — 1) №2] К, хаха. (7.2-16)
The waves in (7.2-16) may be propagated further into the subsequent layers within the
cell by using the appropriate M matrices.
Dispersion Relation and Photonic Band Structure
The dispersion relation is an equation relating the Bloch wavenumber K and the
angular frequency w. Equation (7.2-13), which provides the eigenvalues exp(—j®)
of the unit-cell matrix, is the progenitor of the dispersion relation for the 1D periodic
medium. The phase ® = KA is proportional to K, and t = t(w) is related to w
through the phase delay associated with propagation through the unit cell, so that (7.2-
13), written in the form
K 1
cos (===) = Re{ a} ; (7.2-17)
8 t() Dispersion Relation

7.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 283
is the w — К dispersion relation. Here, g = 27/A is the fundamental spatial frequency
of the periodic medium.

The function cos(27K/g) is a periodic function of К of period g = 27/A, so that
for a given w, (7.2-17) has multiple solutions. However, solutions separated by the pe-
riod g are not independent since they lead to identical Bloch waves. It is therefore com-
mon to limit the domain of the dispersion relation to a period with values of K in the
interval |—g/2, g/2] ог [—a/A,7/A], which is the Brillouin zone. This corresponds
precisely to limiting the phase Ф to the interval [—7, 7]. Also, since cos(27K/g) is
an even function of K, at each value w there are two independent values of K of
equal magnitudes and opposite signs within the Brillouin zone. They correspond to
independent Bloch modes traveling in the forward and backward directions.

The dispersion relation exhibits multiple spectral bands classified into two regimes:

= Propagation regime. Spectral bands within which K is real correspond to prop-

agating modes. Defined by the condition | Re{1/t(w)}| < 1, these bands are
numbered, 1, 2, ..., starting with the lowest-frequency band.

= Photonic-bandgap regime. Spectral bands within which K is complex corre-

spond to evanescent waves that are rapidly attenuated. Defined by the condition
|Re{1/t(w)}| > 1, these bands correspond to the stop bands of the diffraction
grating discussed in Sec. 7.1C. They are also called photonic bandgaps (PBG)
or forbidden gaps since propagating modes do not exist.

The dispersion relation is often plotted with К measured in units of g = 27/A,
the fundamental spatial frequency of the periodic structure, whereas w is measured
in units of the Bragg frequency мв = ac/A, where с = со/П and п is the average
refractive index of the periodic medium. The ratio ив /(g/2) = с, which is the slope
of the dispersion relation w = cK for propagation in a homogeneous medium with the
average refractive index.

EXAMPLE 7.2-1. Periodic Stack of Partially Reflective Mirrors. The dispersion relation
for a wave traveling along the axis of a periodic stack of identical partially reflective lossless mirrors
with power reflectance |r|? and intensity transmittance |t|? = 1 — |r|?, separated by a distance A, is
determined directly from Example 7.1-7. Using the results obtained there, namely t = |t|e?” with
yp = nk, A = (w/c)A, in conjunction with (7.2-13), provides the dispersion relation
cos( 20%) = т «(т =.) ; (7.2-18)
Е It] ws
where g = 27/A, and wg = c7/A is the Bragg frequency. This result is plotted in Fig. 7.2-4.
eet
Eo fe | Figure 7.2-4 Dispersion diagram of a pe-
„т a riodic set of mirrors, each with intensity
WB transmittance |t|? = 0.5, separated by a
a = distance A. Here, ив = mc/A and в =
| a | 2n/A. The dotted straight lines represent
propagation in a homogeneous medium for
Ис nl | which w/K = ws /(g/2) =
-g/2 0 к 82

284 CHAPTER 7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
The photonic bandgaps, which correspond to frequency regions where (7.2-18) does not admit a real
solution, are centered at we, 2we, .... These frequency regions do not permit propagating modes;
rather, they correspond to the stop bands that exhibit unity reflectance in Fig. 7.1-10. In this system,
the onset of the lowest photonic bandgap is at w = 0.
EXAMPLE 7.2-2. Alternating Dielectric Layers. A periodic medium comprises alternating
dielectric layers of refractive indices п: and nz, with corresponding widths d, and 45, and period
A = 4, + dy. This system is the dielectric Bragg grating described in Example 7.1-8 with № = со.
For a wave traveling along the axis of periodicity, Re{1/t} = Re{A} is given by (7.1-58). Using
the relations 1 + yo = ko(nidi + п2а2) = mw/we and y, — yo = Cmw/we, where ив =
(с/п)(п/А) is the Bragg frequency, п = (nid) + п242)/Л is the average refractive index and
с = (midi — п2а?2) /(п1 1 + ned), (7.2-13) provides the dispersion relation

cos (275) = — cos (=) — |r12|? cos («=| ; (7.2-19)

g tieter We we

where 412421 = 4тл т / (пл + n2)? and |ri|? = (ng — пт)? / (пл + ny)”.

An example of this dispersion relation is plotted in Fig. 7.2-5 for dielectric materials with па = 1.5
and nz = 3.5, and 41 = 42. As with the periodic stack of partially reflective mirrors considered in
Example 7.2-1, the photonic bandgaps are centered at the frequencies w and its multiples, and occur
at either the center of the Brillouin zone (K = 0) or at its edge (K = g/2). In this case, however, the
frequency region surrounding w = 0 admits propagating modes instead of a forbidden gap. Dielectric
materials with lower contrast have bandgaps of smaller width, but the bandgaps exist no matter how
small the contrast.

nN, Ny — A —

ON wa °
г | Figure 7.2-5 Dispersion diagram of ап
- - alternating-layer periodic dielectric medium
we with ny = 1.5 and ny = 3.5, and dy = do.
ve =” Here, ив = mc,/An and g = 2” /А. The
dotted straight lines represent propagation in
a homogeneous medium of mean refractive
index 7, so that w/K = ав /(&/2) =c¢,/n =

oon 0 K 82 с.
ини |
Phase and Group Velocities
The propagation constant K corresponds to a phase velocity w/K and an effective
refractive index neg = CoK/w. The group velocity о = dw/dK, which governs
pulse propagation in the medium, is associated with an effective group index Neg =
Cod K /dw (see Sec.5.7). These indices can be determined at any point on the w-K
dispersion curve by finding the slope dw/dK, and the ratio w/K, i.e., the slope of
a line joining the point with the origin. Figure 7.2-6 is a schematic illustration of a
dispersion relation of an alternating-layer dielectric periodic medium, together with
the effective index and group index, at frequencies extending over two photonic bands
with a photonic bandgap in-between.

At low frequencies within the first photonic band, neg is approximately equal to
the average refractive index п. This is expected since at long wavelengths the material

7.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 285
= = --
% 8/2 8 K п Пе п Nett
Figure 7.2-6 Frequency dependence of the effective refractive index neg, which determines the
phase velocity, and the effective group index №, which determines the group velocity.
behaves as a homogeneous medium with the average refractive index. With increase of
frequency, Neg increases above п, reaching its highest value at the band edge. At the
bottom of the second band, neg is smaller than n but increases at higher frequencies,
approaching 7 in the middle of the band.

This drop of пися from a value above average just below the bandgap to a value
below average just above the bandgap is attributed to the significantly different spatial
distributions of the corresponding Bloch modes, which are orthogonal. The mode at
the top of the lower band, has greater energy in the dielectric layers with the higher
refractive index, so that its effective index is greater than the average. For the mode at
the bottom of the upper band, greater energy is localized in the layers with the lower
refractive index, and the effective index is therefore lower than the average.

The frequency dependence of the effective group index follows a different pattern,
as shown in Fig. 7.2-6. As the edges of the bandgap are approached, from below or
above, this index increases substantially, so that the group velocity is much smaller,
1.е., optical pulses are very slow near the edges of the bandgap.

Off-Axis Dispersion Relation and Band Structure

The dispersion relation for off-axis waves may be determined by using the same equa-
tion, cos(KA) = Re{1/t(w)}, where Re{1/t(w)} now depends оп the angles of
incidence within the layers of each segment and on the state of polarization (TE or TM).
For example, for a periodic medium made of alternating dielectric layers, Re{1/t(w) }
takes the more general form in (7.1-59).

Since the same transverse component k,, of the wavevector determines the angles of
incidence at the two layers (К, = nik, sin 01 = пэКо sin 63), it is more convenient to
express the dispersion relation as a function of k,, in the form of a three-dimensional
surface w = w(K,k,). Every value of k, yields a dispersion diagram with bands and
bandgaps similar to those of Fig. 7.2-5.

A simpler representation of the w(K, К.) 3D surface is the projected dispersion
diagram, which displays in a two-dimensional plot of the edges of the bands and
bandgaps at each value of k,, for both TE and TM polarizations, as illustrated in
Fig. 7.2-7. This figure is constructed by determining the ranges of angular frequencies
over which photonic bands and bandgaps exist in the dispersion diagram for a particular
value of k, and then projecting these onto corresponding vertical lines at that value of
k in the projected dispersion diagram. The loci of all such vertical lines for the bands
at different values of k,, correspond to the shaded (green) areas displayed in Fig. 7.2-7;
the unshaded (white) areas represent the bandgaps.

In this diagram, each angle of incidence is represented by a straight line passing
through the origin. For example, the incidence angle 91 in layer 1 corresponds to the
line К, = (w/c,) sin 01, 1.е., w = (с1/ зщ 01)К,, where cy = со/тл. The line w =
cik,, called the light line corresponds to 6; = 90°. Similar lines may be drawn for

286 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
й ТМ polarization | ТЕ polarization x | р Ie лк
мА | / / 00°
|
м Вы
1 2
= j ,
SNARE WH, РА Figure 7.2-7 Projected dispersion diagram
Nes for an alternating-layer periodic dielectric
we IN 4 medium with п = 1.5, nop = 3.5, and
> NOH и 4: = dy = 4/2. Here, ив = псьо/Ай and
\ i / & = 2” / А. Photonic bands are shaded (green).
The dashed lines represent fixed angles of
incidence 6, in layer 1, including the Brewster
И angle 9в = 66.8°. Points within the region
| N a bounded by the light lines w = c,k, and

05 =< О ke 2 v= cok, represent normal-to-axis waves.
the incidence angles in medium 2; Fig. 7.2-7 shows only the light line w = соку,
assuming that n2 > пл, 1.е., с2 < си. Points in the region bounded by the two light lines
represent normal-to-axis modes, which travel in the lateral direction by undergoing
total reflection in the denser medium (medium 2).

The question arises as to whether there exists a frequency range over which prop-
agation is forbidden at all angles of incidence 01 and 95 and for both polarizations.
This could occur if the forbidden gaps at all values of k, between the lines А, = 0
and К, = w/c, and for both polarizations, were to align in such a way as to create a
common or complete photonic bandgap. This is clearly not the case in the example
in Fig. 7.2-7. It turns out that this is not possible; complete photonic bandgaps cannot
exist within 1D periodic structures. However, they can occur in 2D and 3D periodic
structures, as we shall see in Sec. 7.3.

Indeed, there is one special case in which a photonic bandgap cannot occur at all,
and that is an oblique TM wave propagating at the Brewster angle 9в = tan~!(n2/n1)
in layer 1. As shown in Fig. 7.2-7, the line at the Brewster angle does not pass through
a gap. This is not surprising since at this angle, the reflectance of a unit cell is zero, and
the forward and backward waves are uncoupled so that the collective effect that leads
to total reflection is absent.

C. Fourier Optics of Periodic Media

The matrix analysis of periodic media presented in the previous section is applicable
to layered (i.e., piecewise homogeneous) media. A more general approach, applicable
for arbitrary periodic media, including continuous media, is based on a Fourier-series
representation of periodic functions and conversion of the Helmholtz equation into a
set of algebraic equations whose solution provides the dispersion relation and the Bloch
modes. This approach can also be generalized to 2D and 3D periodic media, as will be
shown in Sec. 7.3.

A wave traveling along the axis of a 1D periodic medium (the z axis) and polarized
in the г direction is described by the generalized Helmholtz equation (7.2-2). Since
1(z) is periodic with period A, it can be expanded in a Fourier series,

Cc
n(z) = У^ neexp(—jlg2), (7.2-20)
f=—0o

7.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 287
where g = 2 /Л is the spatial frequency (rad/mm) of the periodic structure and пр is
the Fourier coefficient representing the /th harmonic. The impermeability n(z) is real,
so that n_¢ = пр.

The periodic portion of the Bloch wave px (z) in (7.2-4) may also be expanded in a
Fourier series,

рк(2) = »` Cmexp(—jmgz), (7.2-21)
m=—co
whereupon the Bloch wave representation of the magnetic field may be written as
со
H,(z)= S> Cmexp[—j(K + тв). (7.2-22)
m=—co
For brevity, the dependence of the Fourier coefficients {С } on the Bloch wavenumber
K is suppressed. Substituting these expansions into the Helmholtz equation (7.2-2) and
equating harmonic terms of the same spatial frequency, we obtain
Co we
So Ри = Cm, Fme = (К +mg)(K + lg) nme, (7.2-23)
l=—00 Со
where m = 0,+1,+2,....

The differential equation (7.2-2) has now been converted into a set of linear equa-
tions (7.2-23) for the unknown Fourier coefficients {Ст}. These equations may be
cast in the form of a matrix eigenvalue problem. For each К, the eigenvalues w?/c?
correspond to multiple values of w, from which the w-K dispersion relation may be
constructed. The eigenvectors are sets of {C,,,} coefficients, which determine the peri-
odic function px (z) of the Bloch mode for each К.

Posed as an eigenvalue problem for a matrix F with elements Рис, this set of
coupled equations may be solved using standard numerical techniques. Since ие =
Прп the matrix F is Hermitian, i.e., Fine = Ри. Note that if we were to use the
electric-field Helmholtz equation instead of the magnetic-field Helmholtz equation
(7.2-2), we would obtain another matrix representation of the eigenvalue problem, but
the matrix would be non-Hermitian, and therefore more difficult to solve. This is the
rationale for working with the Helmholtz equation for the magnetic field."
Approximate Solution of the Eigenvalue Problem
In (7.2-23), the harmonics of the optical wave are coupled via the harmonics of the
periodic medium. Ап optical-wave harmonic of spatial frequency К + 65 mixes with
a medium harmonic of spatial frequency (т, — @)g and contributes to the optical-wave
harmonic of spatial frequency (К + 68) + (т — ВЕ = К + тв.

The conditions under which strong coupling emerges can be determined by separat-
ing out the mth term in (7.2-23), which leads to

_ K + g)(K
Cn = > Mmae (АВК + mg) _ Cy, m=0,+1,+2,..., (12-24)
т По (пи /со) > (К + тё)

1 It can be shown that the differential operator in the generalized magnetic-field Helmholtz equation (7.0-2) is

Hermitian whereas that in the electric-field Helmholtz equation (7.0-2) is non-Hermitian.

288 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
where 7 = 1/\/1о is an average refractive index of the medium. Strong coupling
between the mth harmonic of the wave and other harmonics exists if the denominator
in (7.2-24) is small, 1.e.,

wn/Co = |K + тв|. (7.2-25)
This equation represents a resonance condition for interaction between the harmonics.
It can also be regarded as a phase-matching condition.

Figure 7.2-8 is a plot of (7.2-25) as an equality. For each value of m, the w-K
relation is a V-shaped curve. The intersection points of these curves represent common
values of w and K at which (7.2-25) is simultaneously satisfied for two harmonics. The
intersections between the т, = 0 curve (dashed) and the curves form = —1,m = —2,
..., are marked by filled circles; they correspond to the lowest-order bandgaps 1, 2,
..., respectively. At each intersection point, K is an integer multiple of ТЕ, and w
is an integer multiple of the Bragg frequency ив = (c,/n)g/2 or ив/2т = ив =
(co/7)/2A. This corresponds to the Bragg wavelength Аз = 2A in the medium, and
therefore to total reflection. Unmarked intersections in Fig. 7.2-8 are not independent
since each of these has the same w as a marked intersection, and a value of K differing
by a reciprocal lattice constant g.

Ww
>< 3K Figure 7.2-8 Plot of (7.2-25), as an
PA NON Е equality, for various values of т. The
> a т = 0 curve is indicated as dashed.
m=lY“—P NY > Ди т=-3 Strong coupling between the harmonics
PN | of the optical wave and those of the
wee eK medium occurs at the intersection points
m= о ВИ ЕР №, —2 1, 2,..., which correspond to the lowest-
~ : order bandgaps.

0 58 8 38 28 K

The lowest-order bandgap occurs at the intersection of the т = 0 and т = —1
curves (point | in Fig. 7.2-8). In this case, only the coefficients Co and C_, are strongly
coupled, so that (7.2-24) yields two coupled equations

nm (K—g)K
Co = — С, 7.2-26
0 No wn? /e2 — К? 1 ( )
Ш K(K — 8)
C4 = — к (0, 7.2-27
1 по w/e — (К 8 ree?
where n_1 = 1} . These equations are self-consistent if
2 -2 -2
mI К?(К —g)? = we _ к Ве -(К- =) (7.2-28)
No о о Dispersion
Relation
A plot of this equation (Fig. 7.2-9) yields the w-K dispersion relation near the edge of
the bandgap, where the equation is valid. For K = р 5, (7.2-28) yields two frequencies,
we = we V1 +t |nil/no, (7.2-29)

7.2 ONE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 289
representing the edges of the first photonic bandgap. The center of the bandgap is at
the Bragg frequency we = (c,/nm)(g/2) = (п/А)(со/п). The ratio of the gap width
to the midgap frequency, which is called the gap-midgap ratio, grows with increasing
impermeability contrast ratio |n1|/no.

Ww oom р
“ Bandgap 2 : 7
Wy ! | Figure 7.2-9 Dispersion relation in the vicinity of
ne ed Bandgap 1 photonic bandgaps.
0 р и
0 18 8 K
A similar procedure can be followed to determine the spectral width of higher-order
bandgaps. The width of the mth bandgap is determined by a formula identical to (7.2-
29), but the ratio Пшт|/по replaces |n1|/no, so that higher bandgaps are governed by
higher spatial harmonics of the periodic function n(z).
Off-Axis Waves
The dispersion relation for off-axis waves may be determined by use of the same
Fourier expansion technique. For a TM-polarized off- axis wave traveling in an ar-
bitrary direction in the 1—5 plane, the Helmholtz equation is given by (7.2-3). The
Bloch wave is a generalization of (7.2-22) obtained via (7.2-6),
со
H,(z) = У` Cm exp [—j(K + mg)z] exp(—jkz2). (7.2-30)
т=— осо
Carrying out calculations similar to the on-axis case, leads to the following set of
algebraic equations for the Си, coefficients:
So Fine Ce = =z Сы» Fe = (К + (8)(К + mg) + 2] пт.  (1.2-31)
(=—со о
Equation (7.2-31) is a generalization of (7.2-23) for the off-axis wave. The dispersion
relation may be determined by solving this matrix eigenvalue problem for the set of
frequencies w associated with each pair of values of К and ky.
D. Boundaries Between Periodic and Homogeneous Media
The study of light wave propagation in periodic media has so far been limited to deter-
mining the dispersion relation and its associated band structure, as well as estimating
the phase and group velocity of such waves. By definition, the periodic medium extend
indefinitely in all directions. The next step is to examine reflection and transmission
at boundaries between periodic and homogeneous media. We first examine reflection
from a single boundary and subsequently consider a slab of periodic medium embed-
ded in a homogeneous medium. Other configurations made of homogeneous structures
such slabs or holes embedded in extended periodic media are described in Sec. 10.4
and Sec. 11.4D.

290 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS

Omnidirectional Reflection at a Single Boundary

We examine the reflection and transmission of an optical wave at the boundary between
a semi-infinite homogeneous medium and a semi-infinite one-dimensional periodic
medium, as portrayed in Fig. 7.2-10. We demonstrate that, under certain conditions and
within a specified range of angular frequencies, the periodic medium acts as a perfect
mirror, totally reflecting waves incident from any direction and with any polarization!

Wave transmission and reflection at the boundary between two media is governed
by the phase-matching condition. At the boundary between two homogeneous media,
for example, the transverse components of the wavevector А, must be the same оп
both sides of the boundary. Since К, = ksin@ = (w/co)nsin 0, this condition means
that the product n sin 9 is invariant. This is the origin of Snell’s law of refraction, as
explained in Sec. 2.4A.

Similarly, for a wave incident from a homogeneous medium into a one-dimensional
periodic medium, k, must remain the same. Thus, if the incident wave has angular
frequency w and angle of incidence 6, we have К, = (w/c,)nsin 0, where п, is the
refractive index of the homogeneous medium. Knowing К, and w, we can use the
dispersion relation w = w(K,k,) for the periodic medium at the appropriate polari-
zation to determine the Bloch wavenumber K. If the angular frequency w lies within
a forbidden gap at this value of k,, the incident wave will not propagate into the
periodic medium but will, instead, be totally reflected. This process is repeated for
all frequencies, angles of incidence, and polarizations of the incident wave.

We now consider the possibility that the boundary acts as an omnidirectional reflec-
tor (a perfect mirror). For this purpose, we use the projected dispersion diagram, which
displays the bandgaps for each value of k,, as illustrated in the example provided in
Fig. 7.2-10. On the same diagram, we delineate by a red dashed line the w-k, region
that can be accessed by waves entering from the homogeneous medium. This region is
defined by the equation k,, = (w/c,)n sin 0, which dictates that К, < (w/co)n or w >
(co/n)k,; it is thus bounded by the line w = (c,/n)kz, or w/we = (n/n)[ke/(g/2)],
known as the light line. This line corresponds to an angle 9 = 90° in the surrounding
medium.

Figure 7.2-10 reproduces Fig. 7.2-7 with the light lines added, and the permissible
w-k, regions within the light lines highlighted. Waves incident from the homogeneous
medium at all angles, and both polarizations, are represented by points within this
region; points outside this region are not accessible by waves incident from the homo-
geneous medium regardless of their angle of incidence or polarization. The spectral
band bounded by the angular frequencies ил and wg, as defined in Fig. 7.2-10, is of
particular interest inasmuch as all w-k, points lying in this band are within a photonic
bandgap. In this spectral band, therefore, no incident wave, regardless of its angle or
polarization, can be matched with a propagating wave in the periodic medium — the
boundary then acts as a perfect omnidirectional reflector. Also illustrated in Fig. 7.2-10
is a second spectral band, at higher angular frequencies, that behaves in the same way.
Slab of Periodic Material ina Homogeneous Medium
A slab of 1D periodic material embedded in a homogeneous medium is nothing but a
1D Bragg grating with a finite number of segments. Reflection and transmission from
the Bragg grating has already been examined in Sec. 7.1C.

One would expect that a Bragg grating with a large, but finite, number of seg-
ments М captures the basic properties of a periodic medium made of the same unit
cell. This is in fact the case since the passbands and stop bands of the grating are
mathematically identical to the photonic bands and bandgaps of the extended periodic
medium. However, the spectral transmittance and reflectance of the Bragg grating,
which exhibit oscillatory properties sensitive to the size of the grating and the presence
of its boundaries, do not have their counterparts in the extended periodic structure.

7.3. TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 291
ь TM polarization TE polarization xf п Ny eA
Nery .
а 1 ыы
N J 27
NM eee:
№ Figure 7.2-10 Projected dispersion di-
Ga agram for an alternating-layer dielectric
WB IN 4 medium with ny = 1.5, no = 3.5, and
Ni 4: = dy = A/2. The dotted lines (red)
J are light lines for a homogeneous medium
with refractive index n = 1. In the spectral
band between ил and we, the medium acts
| | \ 7 as a perfect omnidirectional reflector for all
polarizations. A similar band is shown at
0G К. < 0 — k, g higher angular frequencies.

Likewise, the phase and group velocities and the associated effective refractive
indices determined from the dispersion relation in the extended periodic medium do not
have direct counterparts in the finite-size Bragg grating. Nevertheless, such parameters
can be defined for a grating by determining the complex amplitude transmittance t(w)
and matching it with an effective homogeneous medium of the same total thickness d
such that arg{ty } = (w/co)negd. An effective group index Neg = neg +wdneg /dw is
then determined [see (5.7-2)]. The dependence of these effective indices on frequency
is different from that shown in Fig. 7.2-6 for the extended periodic medium in that
it exhibits oscillations within the passbands. However, for sufficiently large N, say
greater than 100, these oscillations are washed out and the effective indices become
nearly the same as those of the extended periodic medium.

Another configuration of interest is a slab of homogeneous medium embedded in
a periodic medium. In this configuration, the light may be trapped in the slab by
omnidirectional reflection from the surrounding periodic medium, so that the slab
becomes an optical waveguide. This configuration is discussed in Sec. 9.5.

7.3 TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS
The concepts introduced in Sec. 7.2 for the study of optical-wave propagation in 1D
periodic media can be readily generalized to 2D and 3D structures. These include
Bloch waves as the modes of the periodic medium and w-K dispersion relations with
photonic bands and bandgaps. In contrast to 1D structures, 2D photonic crystals have
complete 2D photonic bandgaps, i.e., common bandgaps for waves of both polarization
traveling in any direction in the plane of periodicity. However, complete 3D photonic
bandgaps, i.e., common bandgaps for all directions and polarizations, can be achieved
only in 3D photonic crystals. The mathematical treatment of 2D and 3D periodic media
is more elaborate and the visualization of the dispersion diagrams is more difficult
because of the additional degrees of freedom involved, but the concepts are essentially
the same as those encountered for 1D periodic media. This section begins with a simple
treatment of 2D structures followed by a more detailed 3D treatment.

292 CHAPTER7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
A. Two-Dimensional Photonic Crystals
2D Periodic Structures
Consider a 2D periodic structure such as a set of identical parallel rods, tubes, or veins
embedded in a homogeneous host medium [Fig. 7.3-1(а)] and organized at the points
of a rectangular lattice, as illustrated in Fig. 7.3-1(b). The impermeability п(х, у) =
€o/€(x, y) is periodic in the transverse directions, x and у, and uniform in the axial
direction z. If a; and ag are the periods in the x and у directions, then n(, у) satisfies
the translational symmetry relation
n(x + тат, у + тра) = n(x, y), (7.3-1)

for all integers m1 and mz. This periodic function is represented as a 2D Fourier series,

п(т,у) = S> So nae exp (—jligi2) exp (-76852), (7.3-2)

£4 =—00 lg =—00

where g, = 27/a and gy = 2т /а2 are fundamental spatial frequencies (radians/mm)
in the x and у directions, and ¢;g, and £9g5 are their harmonics. The coefficients ne, „д,
depend on the actual profile of the periodic function, e.g., the size of the rods.

The 2D Fourier transform of the periodic function is composed of points (delta
functions) on a rectilinear lattice, as shown in Fig. 7.3-1(c). This Fourier-domain lattice
is known to solid-state physicists as the reciprocal lattice.

What are the optical modes of a medium with such symmetry? The answer is a
simple generalization of the 1D case given in (7.2-4). For waves traveling in a direction
parallel to the х—у plane, the modes are 2D Bloch waves,

U(x, Y) = рк‚,к, (2, у) exp(—jKe) exp(—jKyy), (7.3-3)
where px,,,k, (x,y) is a periodic function with the same periods as the medium. The
wave is specified by a pair of Bloch wavenumbers (K,, K,). Another wave with Bloch
wavenumbers (K, + g,,Ky + 82) is not a new mode. As shown in Fig. 7.3-1(с) а
complete set of modes in the Fourier plane has Bloch wavenumbers located at points
in a rectangle defined by [—g,/2 < Kz < g,/2] and [-85/2 < Ky < gy/2], which is
the first Brillouin zone.

Other symmetries may be used to reduce the set of independent Bloch wavevectors
within the Brillouin zone. When all symmetries are included, the result is an area called
the irreducible Brillouin zone. For example, the rotational symmetry inherent in the
square lattice results in an irreducible Brillouin zone in the form of a triangle, as shown
in Fig 7.3-1(d).
2D Skew-Periodic Structures
An example of another class of 2D periodic structures is a set of parallel cylindrical
holes placed at the points of a triangular lattice, as illustrated in Fig. 7.3-2(a). Since the
lattice points are skewed (not aligned with x and у axis), we use two primitive vectors
a, and apg [Fig. 7.3-2(b)] to generate the lattice via the lattice vector В = ma, +
MA, where m, and mz are integers. We also define a position vector г. = (x, у) so
that the periodic function e(r;) = (5, у) satisfies the translational symmetry relation
(г. +R) = e€(r~) (the subscript “T” indicates transverse).

The 2D Fourier series of such a function is a set of points on a reciprocal lattice
defined by the vectors 91 and g., which are orthogonal to a; and ag, respectively,
and have magnitudes g, = 27/a,sin@ and g, = 2 /а2 эт 0, where 9 is the angle
between a; and ag. The 2D reciprocal lattice is also a triangular lattice generated by

7.3 TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 293
ky}

9059 -— о м

— ©: O —
&
(a) 2D periodic structure (b) Lattice (c) Reciprocal lattice (d) Irreducible
Brillouin zone
Figure 7.3-1 (a) A 2D periodic structure comprising parallel rods. (b) The rectangular lattice at
which the rods are placed. (c) The 2D Fourier transform of the lattice points is another set of points
forming a reciprocal lattice with periods g, = 2m/a; and в. = 27/az. The shaded (yellow) area
is the Brillouin zone. (d) For a square lattice (41 = a2 = a), the irreducible Brillouin zone is the
triangle TMX.
< k
Г © ols и; м к
ASIP д > 4 \
NG и \
Е] \
(a) 2D periodic structure (b) Lattice (c) Reciprocal lattice (d) Irreducible
Brillouin zone
Figure 7.3-2 (a) A 2D periodic structure comprising parallel cylindrical holes. (b) The triangular
lattice at which the holes are placed. In this diagram the magnitudes aj = ag = a and 9 = 120°.
(c) Reciprocal lattice; the shaded (yellow) area is the Brillouin zone, a hexagon. (d) The irreducible
Brillouin zone is the triangle ГМК.
the vector G = (19, +4595, where 61 and 45 are integers, as illustrated in Fig. 7.3-2(c).
For waves traveling in a direction parallel to the х-у plane, the Bloch modes are
U(re) = рк(гт) ехр(—7Кх - rr), (7.3-4)
where K; = (Kz, K,) is the Bloch wavevector and рк., (г) is a 2D periodic function
on the same lattice. Two Bloch modes with Bloch wavevectors K, and K, + G are
equivalent. To cover a complete set of Bloch wavevectors, we therefore need only
consider vectors within the Brillouin zone shown in Fig. 7.3-2(c).

The dispersion relation can be determined by ensuring that the Bloch wave in (7.3-3)
or (7.3-4) satisfies the generalized Helmholtz equation. The calculations are facilitated
by use of a Fourier series approach, as was done in the 1D case and as will be described
(in a more general form) in the 3D case.
«И
EXAMPLE 7.3-1. Cylindrical Holes оп а Triangular Lattice. А 2D photonic crystal сот-
prises a homogeneous medium (n = 3.6) with air-filled cylindrical holes of radius 0.48 a organized
at the points of a triangular lattice with lattice constant a. The calculated dispersion relation, shown
in Fig. 7.3-3, for TE and TM waves traveling in the plane of periodicity (К. = 0) exhibits a complete

294 CHAPTER 7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS

2D photonic bandgap at frequencies near the angular frequency wo = mc,/a.' As in the 1D case,
the gap can be made wider by use of materials with greater refractive-index contrast. Indeed, most
geometries exhibit photonic bandgaps if the constituent materials have sufficiently high contrast.

This photonic-crystal structure finds use as a “holey” optical fiber, which has a number of salutary
properties (see Sec. 10.4).

TEC nia) (Fy тм ПЕШИЙ
Un |

| = <
— <
0 mai yl [<
Г M K Kr rr M K Kr г
Figure 7.3-3 Calculated band structure of a 2D photonic crystal consisting of а homogeneous
medium (n = 3.6) with air-filled cylindrical holes of radius 0.48 а organized at the points of a
triangular lattice with lattice constant a. The abscissa spans Bloch wavevectors defined by points on
the periphery of the irreducible Brillouin zone, the ГМК triangle. The ordinate is plotted in units
of wo = 1c, /a. The wave travels in the plane of periodicity and has TE polarization (left) and TM

polarization (right). The complete 2D photonic bandgap in the vicinity of wo is highlighted.
«ПИ

For an oblique wave traveling at an angle with respect to the т—у plane, the Bloch

wave in (7.3-4) becomes

U(r) = px (tr) exp(—jKy - rr) exp(—jkzz), (7.3-5)
where k, is a constant. The band structure then takes the form of a set of surfaces of
w = w(Ky, kz).

A complete 3D photonic bandgap is a range of frequencies w crossed by none of
these surfaces, 1.е., values of w that are not obtained by any combination of real К»
and k,. While a complete 2D photonic bandgap exists for k, = 0, as illustrated by the
example in Fig. 7.3-3, a photonic bandgap for all off-axis waves is not attainable in 2D
periodic structures.

*B. Three-Dimensional Photonic Crystals
Crystal Structure
A 3D photonic crystal is generated by the placement of copies of a basic dielectric
structure, such as a sphere or a cube, at points of a 3D lattice generated by the lattice
vectors В = та! +тра›-+тзаз, where m1, 72, and m3 are integers, and ал, ag, and
аз are primitive vectors defining the lattice unit cell. The overall structure is periodic

1 See S. G. Johnson and J. О. Joannopoulos, Block-Iterative Frequency-Domain Methods for Maxwell’s
Equations in a Planewave Basis, Optics Express, vol. 8, pp. 173-190, 2001.

7.3. TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 295
and its physical properties, such as the permittivity (г) and the impermeability n(r) =
€,/e€(r), are invariant to translation by В, so that

n(r +R) =n(r) (7.3-6)
for all positions r.
This periodic function may therefore be expanded in a 3D Fourier series,
n(r) = Sone exp(—jG-r), (7.3-7)
G
where G = (191 + 456. + (39-3 is a vector defined by the primitive vectors 91, 92,
and Qs, of another lattice, the reciprocal lattice, and 1, 65, and 63, are integers. The g
vectors are related to the a vectors via
a X аз аз ха: а! X ao
Ч = 2a ———_.,,_ ФЕ, 93 = 29 —_—__.,,__ (73-8)
aj: ag х аз aj: a xX ag aj: ag х аз
so that g,-a4 =2n, 9: -а> = 0, and g, - аз = 0, Le., 91 is orthogonal to az and аз
and its length is inversely proportional to a;. Similar properties apply to 9. and Q3. It
can also be shown that G- В = 27.

If aj, ag, and аз are mutually orthogonal, then g,, 92, and 9. are also mutually
orthogonal and the magnitudes g, = 27/a1, gy = 2m/az, and gz = 27/as are the
spatial frequencies associated with the periodicities in the three directions, respectively.
An example of a 3D crystal lattice and its corresponding reciprocal lattice is shown in
Fig. 7.3-4.

2 5 4 к 4
„А. et бо |
ena: cD 9—9 wae

es Cee EnO aaa iy ca |

СОА, ое an
OES a ern:

(d) Irreducible

(a) 3D periodic structure (b) Lattice (c) Reciprocal lattice Brillouin zone
Figure 7.3-4 (a) A 3D periodic structure comprising dielectric spheres. (6) The spheres are
placed at the points of a diamond (face-centered cubic) lattice for which ay = (a/V/2)(K + У),
ay = (a/V2)(¥ +2), and аз = (a//2)(X+2), where a is the lattice constant. (с) The corresponding
reciprocal lattice is a body-centered cubic lattice with a Brillouin zone indicated by the shaded
volume, known as a Wigner—Seitz cell. (d) The irreducible Brillouin zone is the polyhedron whose
corner points are marked by the crystallographic symbols TXULKW.

Bloch Modes

The modes of a 3D periodic medium are waves that maintain their shape upon trans-
lation by a lattice vector R, changing only by a multiplicative constant of unity mag-
nitude. These modes have the Bloch form рк (г) exp(—jK - г) where px (г) is a 3D
periodic function, with the periodicity described by the same lattice vector R; K is the
Bloch wavevector; and @ is a unit vector in the direction of polarization. The Bloch
mode is a traveling plane wave exp(—jK - г) modulated by a periodic function рк (г).

296 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
Translation Бу В results in multiplication by a phase factor exp(—jK . В), which
depends on K.

Two modes with Bloch wavevectors К and К’ = К + G are equivalent since
exp(—jK’-R) = exp(—jK-R_), 1.е., translation by В is equivalent to multiplication by
the same phase factor. This is because exp(—j7G@-R) = exp(—j27) = 1. Therefore,
for the complete specification of all modes, we need only consider values of K within
a finite volume of the reciprocal lattice, the Brillouin zone. The Brillouin zone is the
volume of points that are closer to one specific reciprocal lattice point (the origin of the
zone, denoted Г) than to any other lattice point. Other symmetries of the lattice permit
further reduction of that volume to the irreducible Brillouin zone, as illustrated by the
example in Fig. 7.3-4.

Photonic Band Structure

To determine the w-K dispersion relation for a 3D periodic medium, we begin with
the eigenvalue problem described by the generalized Helmholtz equation (7.0-2). One
approach for solving this problem is to generalize the Fourier method that was intro-
duced in Sec. 7.2C for 1D periodic structures. By expanding the periodic functions
n(r) and рк(г) in Fourier series, the differential equation (7.0-2) is converted into a
set of algebraic equations leading to a matrix eigenvalue problem that can be solved
numerically using matrix methods. As discussed at the end of Sec. 7.2C, we work with
the magnetic field to ensure Hermiticity of the matrix representation.

Expanding the periodic function рк (г) in the Bloch wave into a 3D Fourier series

Рк(г) = У` Се ехр(-1@ .г), (7.3-9)
G
we write the magnetic-field vector in the Bloch form
H(r) = px(r) exp(—jK -r)é = У > Cg exp[—j(K + G) - r]é. (7.3-10)
G
For notational simplicity, the dependence of the Fourier coefficients Сс on the Bloch
wavevector K is not explicitly indicated. Substituting (7.3-7) and (7.3-10) into (7.0-
2), using the relation У x exp(—jK-r)@ = — (К x e) exp(—jK - г), and equating
harmonic terms of the same spatial frequency yields
/ “a и? д
-У `(К-+@)х [K+ @’) ха] пе_< Cor = > Сыё. (7.3-11)
С: Со
Forming а dot product with е on both sides, and using the vector identity A-(B x C) =
—(B x A) -C leads to
w A / A
У` Рас’ Ca = 2 Се, Feo = [(K+G) x е] . (К+@ ) х е] Па_<’. (7.3-12)
G oO

The Helmholtz differential equation has now been converted into a set of linear
equations for the Fourier coefficients {Сс}. Since n(z) is real, ng_c = П*,_<,› and
the matrix Рес’ is Hermitian. Hence, (7.3-12) represents an eigenvalue problem for
a Hermitian matrix. For each Bloch wavevector К, the eigenvalues w?/c? provide
multiple values of w, which are used to construct the w-K diagram and the photonic
band structure. The eigenvectors {Сс} determine the periodic function рк(г) of the
Bloch wave.

7.3. TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL PHOTONIC CRYSTALS 297
Examples of Structures
Spherical holes on a diamond lattice. An example of a 3D photonic crystal that
has been shown to exhibit a complete 3D photonic bandgap comprises air spheres
embedded in a high-index material at the points of a diamond (face-centered cubic)
lattice (see Fig. 7.3-4). The radii of the air spheres are sufficiently large such that
the spheres overlap, thereby creating intersecting veins. The calculated band structure,
shown in Fig. 7.3-5, has a relatively wide complete 3D photonic bandgap between
the two lowest bands. Silicon photonic crystals with an inverse-opal structure have
been fabricated by inserting silicon into the voids of a self-assembled opal template
comprising close-packed silica spheres; these are connected by small “necks” formed
during sintering. As a final step the silica template is removed.‘
"ВЕТ | ЕЕ
<
fo bandgap |. Figure 7.3-5 Calculated band structure of
wo a 3D photonic crystal with a diamond (face-
i ~ | centered cubic) lattice of lattice constant
a. The structure comprises air spheres of
radius 0.325 a embedded in a homogeneous
material of refractive index n = 3.6. The
complete photonic bandgap extends from
№ и| approximately о = лсо/а to 1.32 wo (see
footnote on page 294).
XU L Г к xX WK
Yablonovite. The first experimental observation of a complete 3D photonic bandgap
was made by Eli Yablonovitch and colleagues in 1991 using a variant of the diamond
lattice structure now known as Yablonovite.* This slanted-pore structure is fabricated
by drilling a periodic array of cylindrical holes at specified angles in a dielectric slab.
Three holes are drilled at each point of a 2D triangular lattice at the surface of the slab;
the directions of the holes are parallel to three of the axes of the diamond lattice, as
shown in Fig. 7.3-6(a). This structure exhibits a complete 3D photonic bandgap with a
gap-midgap ratio of 0.19 when the refractive index of the material is n = 3.6.
Woodpile. Another 3D photonic-crystal structure, which is simpler to fabricate, is
made of a 1D periodic stack of alternating layers, each of which is itself a 2D photonic
crystal. For example, the woodpile structure illustrated in Fig. 7.3-6(b) uses layers
of parallel logs with a stacking sequence that repeats itself every four layers. The
orientation of the logs in adjacent layers is rotated 90°, and the logs are shifted by half
the pitch every two layers. The resulting structure has a face-centered-tetragonal lattice
symmetry. Fabricated using silicon micromachining, with a minimum feature size of
180 nm, this structure manifested a complete 3D photonic bandgap in the wavelength
range Л = 1.35-1.95 wm.
See A. Blanco, E. Chomski, S. Grabtchak, M. Ibisate, S. John, S. W. Leonard, C. Lopez, F. Meseguer,
H. Miguez, J. P. Mondia, G. А. Ozin, О. Toader, and Н. М. van Driel, Large-Scale Synthesis of a Silicon Photonic
Crystal with a Complete Three-Dimensional Bandgap Near 1.5 Micrometres, Nature, vol. 405, pp. 437—440, 2000.
* See Е. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, and K. M. Leung, Photonic Band Structures: The Face-Centered Cubic
Case Employing Non-Spherical Atoms, Physical Review Letters, vol. 67, pp. 2295—2298, 1991.
* See J. С. Fleming and S.-Y. Lin, Three-Dimensional Photonic Crystal with a Stop Band from 1.35 to 1.95
pm, Optics Letters, vol. 24, pp. 49-51, 1999.

298 — СНАРТЕВ7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS
2-7 1200 Serene
te cS
SN Saree ка
КЕТЬ SSeS
> po
(a) Yablonovite (b) Woodpile (c) Holes and poles
Figure 7.3-6 (a) The Yablonovite photonic crystal is fabricated by drilling cylindrical holes
through a dielectric slab. At each point of a 2D triangular lattice at the surface, three holes are
drilled along directions that make an angle of 35° with the normal and are separated azimuthally by
120°. (b) The woodpile photonic crystal comprises alternating layers of parallel rods, with adjacent
layers oriented at 90°. (c) The holes-and-poles structure consists of alternating layers of 2D periodic
structures: a layer of parallel cylindrical holes on a hexagonal lattice, followed by a layer of parallel
rods lined up to fit between the holes.
Holes and poles. Yet another example is the holes-and-poles structure illustrated in
Fig. 7.3-6(c). Here, two complementary types of 2D-periodic photonic-crystal slabs
are used: dielectric rods in air and air holes in a dielectric. Fabricated in silicon, this
structure exhibited a stop-band for all tilt angles in the Л = 1.15-1.6 ит telecommu-
nications band.‘

Both the holes-and-poles and the woodpile structures offer the opportunity to intro-
duce arbitrary point defects, such as a missing hole or rod, thereby providing means
for fabricating devices such as photonic-crystal waveguides (Sec. 9.5), photonic-crystal
resonators (Sec. 11.4D), and specially controlled light emitters* (Sec. 18.5C). Indeed,
the ability to insert a defect at will may well be the most valuable feature of 2D and
3D photonic structures since 1D periodic media serve admirably as omnidirectional
reflectors.

Fabrication Methods

In the early 1990s, photonic crystals were fabricated using adaptations of conventional
semiconductor nanofabrication techniques. A decade later, by the early 2000s, a host
of new (“bottom-up” and “top-down’’) techniques for the fabrication of 3D photonic
crystals had been developed and implemented with varying degrees of success. The
most prominent of these are colloidal self-assembly, holographic lithography, and di-
rect writing via 3D multiphoton microlithography.

Submicrometer colloidal spheres of uniform size tend to spontaneously assemble
on a face-centered cubic lattice. The resulting material is a synthetic opal, which
serves as a template that can be impregnated with a semiconductor material such as
silicon. Subsequent removal of the template yields a 3D photonic crystal, known as
inverse opal, that consists of the semiconductor material containing periodic spheres
of air. A challenge in using this method is growing the initial opal without forming
polycrystalline segments, which suffer from deleterious lattice defects.

Т See М. Qi, Е. Lidorikis, Р. T. Rakich, $. G. Johnson, J. О. Joannopoulos, Е. P. Ippen, and H. I. Smith, А
Three-Dimensional Optical Photonic Crystal with Designed Point Defects, Nature, vol. 429, pp. 538-542, 2004.

* See 5. Р, Ogawa, M. Imada, S. Yoshimoto, M. Okano, and S. Noda, Control of Light Emission by 3D
Photonic Crystals, Science, vol. 305, рр. 227—229, 2004.

READING LIST 299
In the 3D holographic-lithography approach, multiple laser beams generate inter-
ference patterns that illuminate a film of photoresist. Highly exposed regions of the
photoresist become insoluble and the unexposed regions are washed away. The result
is a periodic structure of cross-linked polymer containing air-filled voids. The use of
liquid-crystal spatial light modulators to govern the phase properties of the various
beams offers (dynamically tunable) interference patterns of arbitrary form. Four beams,
generated by a single laser, are sufficient to create any desired photonic band structure.
In 3D multiphoton microlithography, femtosecond laser pulses are delivered via a
lens to a particular location in a specially designed transparent polymeric material. The
laser power is set at a level that effects multiphoton polymerization only in the vicinity
of the focal region of the lens, where the optical intensity is sufficiently high (see
Sec. 14.5B). The light is able to reach that region without polymerizing the intervening
material because its intensity lies below the polymerization threshold outside the focal
region. The photonic-crystal structure is fabricated by moving the focal point of the
lens to all desired locations, thereby writing the three-dimensional microstructure. The
strong thresholding behavior of the polymerization nonlinearity serves to enhance the
resolution of the process beyond the diffraction limit.
Novel variations accommodate the fabrication of electrically responsive and graded-
index (GRIN) photonic crystals.
READING LIST
Layered and Periodic Media
O. Stenzel, The Physics of Thin Film Optical Spectra: An Introduction, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed.
2015.
A. B. Shvartsburg and A. A. Maradudin, Waves in Gradient Metamaterials, World Scientific/Imperial
College Press, 2013.
R. Kashyap, Fiber Bragg Gratings, Academic Press, 2nd ed. 2010.
5. ViSiiovsky, Optics т Magnetic Multilayers and Nanostructures, CRC Press, 2006.
P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Layered Media, Wiley, 2005.
M. Neviére and E. Popov, Light Propagation in Periodic Media: Differential Theory and Design,
CRC Press, 2003.
M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University Press, 7th expanded and corrected
ed. 2002, Sec. 1.6.
W. С. Chew, Waves and Fields in Inhomogeneous Media, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1990; IEEE Press,
reprinted 1995.
A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals: Propagation and Control of Laser Radiation, Wiley,
1985, paperback reprint 2002.
L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation in Periodic Structures: Electric Filters and Crystal Lattices, Dover,
2nd ed. 1953, reprinted 2003.
Photonic Crystals
Q. Gong and X. Hu, Photonic Crystals: Principles and Applications, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis,
2013.
M. F. Limonov and R. M. De La Rue, Optical Properties of Photonic Structures: Interplay of Order
and Disorder, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2012.
D. W. Prather, S. Shi, A. Sharkawy, J. Murakowski, and G. J. Schneider, Photonic Crystals: Theory,
Applications, and Fabrication, Wiley, 2009.
I. A. Sukhoivanov and I. У. Guryev, Photonic Crystals: Physics and Practical Modeling, Springer-
Verlag, 2009.

300 — CHAPTER7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS

M. Skorobogatiy and J. Yang, Fundamentals of Photonic Crystal Guiding, Cambridge University
Press, 2009.

J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, J. N. Winn, and R. D. Meade, Photonic Crystals: Molding the
Flow of Light, Princeton University Press, 1995, 2nd ed. 2008.

J.-M. Lourtioz, H. Benisty, V. Berger, J.-M. Gérard, D. Maystre, and A. Tchelnokov, Photonic Crys-
tals: Towards Nanoscale Photonic Devices, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2008.

Р. Marko§ and С. М. Soukoulis, Wave Propagation: From Electrons to Photonic Crystals and Left-
Handed Materials, Princeton University Press, 2008.

K. Sakoda, Optical Properties of Photonic Crystals, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2005.

K. Inoue and K. Ohtaka, eds., Photonic Crystals: Physics, Fabrication and Applications, Springer-
Verlag, 2004.

S. Noda and T. Baba, eds., Roadmap on Photonic Crystals, Kluwer, 2003.

V. Kochergin, Omnidirectional Optical Filters, Kluwer, 2003.

Seminal and Review Articles

Г. Nucara, Е. Greco, and У. Mattoli, Electrically Responsive Photonic Crystals: A Review, Journal of
Materials Chemistry С, vol. 3, pp. 8449-8467, 2015.

Q. Zhu, L. Jin, and Y. Fu, Graded Index Photonic Crystals: A Review, Annalen der Physik, vol. 527,
pp. 205-218, 2015.

G. von Freymann, V. Kitaev, B. V. Lotsch, and G. A. Ozin, Bottom-Up Assembly Of Photonic
Crystals, Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 42, рр. 2528—2554, 2013.

D. Xia, J. Zhang, X. He, and S. R. J. Brueck, Fabrication of Three-Dimensional Photonic Crystal
Structures by Interferometric Lithography and Nanoparticle Self-Assembly, Applied Physics Let-
ters, vol. 93, 071105, 2008.

T. Asano, B.-S. Song, Y. Akahane, and S. Noda, Ultrahigh-Q Nanocavities in Two-Dimensional Pho-
tonic Crystal Slabs, JEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 12, pp. 1123-
1134, 2006.

A. Blanco, P. D. Garcia, D. Golmayo, В. H. Juarez, and С. Lépez, Opals for Photonic Band-Gap
Applications, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 12, pp. 1143—1150,
2006.

М. Qi, Е. Lidorikis, P. Т. Rakich, $. G. Johnson, J. О. Joannopoulos, Е. P. Ippen, and H. I. Smith,
A Three-Dimensional Optical Photonic Crystal with Designed Point Defects, Nature, vol. 429,
pp. 538-542, 2004.

$. Р. Ogawa, М. Imada, S. Yoshimoto, М. Okano, and S. Noda, Control of Light Emission by 3D
Photonic Crystals, Science, vol. 305, рр. 227-229, 2004.

E. Yablonovitch, Photonic Crystals: Semiconductors of Light, Scientific American, vol. 285, no. 6,
pp. 47-55, 2001.

Y. A. Vlasov, X. Z. Bo, J. C. Sturm, and D. J. Norris, On-Chip Natural Assembly of Silicon Photonic
Bandgap Crystals, Nature, vol. 414, pp. 289—293, 2001.

S. G. Johnson and J. D. Joannopoulos, Block-Iterative Frequency-Domain Methods for Maxwell’s
Equations in a Planewave Basis, Optics Express, vol. 8, pp. 173-190, 2001.

A. Blanco, E. Chomski, S. Grabtchak, M. Ibisate, S. John, S. W. Leonard, C. Lopez, F. Meseguer,
H. Miguez, J. Р. Mondia, G. A. Ozin, О. Toader, and Н. М. van Driel, Large-Scale Synthesis of
a Silicon Photonic Crystal with a Complete Three-Dimensional Bandgap Near 1.5 Micrometres,
Nature, vol. 405, pp. 437—440, 2000.

M. Campbell, D. N. Sharp, M. T. Harrison, R. G. Denning, and A. J. Turberfield, Fabrication of
Photonic Crystals for the Visible Spectrum by Holographic Lithography, Nature, vol. 404, рр. 53—
56, 2000.

H. B. Sun, S. Matsuo, and H. Misawa, Three-Dimensional Photonic Crystal Structures Achieved with
Two-Photon-Absorption Photopolymerization of Resin, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 74, pp. 786—
788, 1999.

J. G. Fleming and S.-Y. Lin, Three-Dimensional Photonic Crystal with a Stop Band from 1.35 to 1.95
pm, Optics Letters, vol. 24, pp. 49-51, 1999.

J. D. Joannopoulos, P. R. Villeneuve, and S. Fan, Photonic Crystals: Putting a New Twist on Light,
Nature, vol. 386, рр. 143—149, 1997.

PROBLEMS 301

Р. В. Villeneuve and М. Piché, Photonic Bandgaps in Periodic Dielectric Structures, Progress in

Quantum Electronics, vol. 18, рр. 153-200, 1994.
$. John, Localization of Light, Physics Today, vol. 44, по. 5, pp. 32-40, 1991.
E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter, and K. M. Leung, Photonic Band Structures: The Face-Centered Cubic
Case Employing Non-Spherical Atoms, Physical Review Letters, vol. 67, рр. 2295—2298, 1991.
S. John, Strong Localization of Photons in Certain Disordered Dielectric Superlattices, Physical
Review Letters, vol. 58, pp. 2486-2489, 1987.
E. Yablonovitch, Inhibited Spontaneous Emission in Solid-State Physics and Electronics, Physical
Review Letters, vol. 58, рр. 2059-2062, 1987.
PROBLEMS

7.1-2 Beamsplitter Slab. A lossless, dielectric slab of refractive index п and width d, oriented
at 45° with respect to an incident beam, is used as a beamsplitter. Derive expressions for
the transmittance and reflectance for TM polarization and sketch their spectral dependence.
Compare the results with those expected for TE polarization, as provided in Example 7.1-6.

7.1-3 Ай Gap in Glass. Determine the transmittance through a thin planar air gap of width d =
Л/2 in glass of refractive index п. Assume (a) normal incidence, and (b) a TE wave incident
at an angle greater than the critical angle. Can the wave penetrate (tunnel) through the gap?

7.1-4 Multilayer Device in an Unmatched Medium. The complex amplitude reflectance of a
multilayer device is т„, when it is placed in a medium with refractive index n, matching its
front layer. If the device is instead placed in a medium with refractive index n, show that the
amplitude reflectance is т = (ть + Tm)/(1 + Tom), where ть = (п — n1)/(n + пл) is the
reflectance of the new boundary. Determine т in each of the following limiting cases: ть = 0,
ть = 1, Тю = 0,andr,, = 1.

7.1-5 Опамчег-У\Уауе Film: Angular Dependence of Reflectance. Consider the quarter-wave ап-
tireflection coating described in Exercise 7.1-1. Derive an expression for the reflectance as a
function of the angle of incidence.

7.1-6 Transmittance of a Fabry—Perot Etalon. The transmittance of a symmetric Fabry—Perot
etalon was measured by using light from a tunable monochromatic light source. The transmit-
tance versus frequency exhibits periodic peaks of period 150 MHz, each of width (FWHM)
5 MHz. Assuming that the medium within the resonator mirrors is a gas with n = 1,
determine the length and finesse of the resonator. Assuming further that the only source of
loss is associated with the mirrors, find their reflectances.

7.1-7 Quarter-Wave and Half-Wave Stacks. Derive expressions for the reflectance of a stack of
N double layers of dielectric materials of equal optical thickness, nid; = n2d2, equal to
Ло/4 and Ло/2.

7.1-8 GaAs/AlAs Bragg Grating Reflector. А Bragg grating reflector comprises N units of
alternating layers of GaAs (п: = 3.57) and AlAs (nz = 2.94) of widths 4! and 45 equal to
a quarter wavelength in each medium. The grating is placed in an extended GaAs medium.
Calculate and plot the transmittance and reflectance of the grating as functions of N, for
N =1,2,...,10, at a frequency equal to the Bragg frequency.

7.1-9 Bragg Grating: Angular and Spectral Dependence of Reflectance. Based on matrix alge-
bra, determine the wave-transfer matrix and the reflectance of an N-layer alternating-layer
dielectric Bragg grating. Use your program to verify the graphs presented in Fig. 7.1-12 and
Fig. 7.1-13 for the spectral and angular dependence of the reflectance, respectively.

7.2-1 Gap—Midgap Ratio. Using a Fourier optics approach, determine the Bragg frequency and
the gap—midgap ratio for the lowest bandgap of a 1D periodic structure comprising a stack
of dielectric layers of equal optical thickness, with ny = 1.5 and ng = 3.5, and period
A = 2 ym. Assume that the wave travels along the axis of periodicity. Repeat the process for
ny = 3.4 and п = 3.6. Compare your results.

7.2-2 Off-Axis Wave in 1D Periodic Medium. Derive equations analogous to those provided
in (7.2-24)-(7.2-28) for an off-axis wave traveling through a 1D periodic medium with a
transverse wavevector К...

302 CHAPTER 7 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL OPTICS

7.2-3 Normal-to-Axis Wave in a 1D Periodic Medium. Use the results of Prob. 7.2-2 to show
that there are no bandgaps for a wave traveling along the lateral direction of a 1D periodic
medium, 1.е., for К = 0.

7.2-4 Omnidirectional Reflector. A periodic stack of double layers of dielectric materials with
nd, = node, ng = 2n, and A = d, + dz is to be used as an omnidirectional reflector in
air. Plot the projected dispersion relation showing the light line for air (a diagram similar to
Fig. 7.2-10). Determine the frequency range (in units of дв) for omnidirectional reflection.

CHAPTER
с [
8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA 306

A. Wave Propagation in SNG and DNG Media
B. Waves at Boundaries Between DPS, SNG, and DNG Media
*С. Hyperbolic Media
8.2 METAL OPTICS: PLASMONICS 320
A. Optical Properties of Metals
в. Metal—Dielectric Boundary: Surface Plasmon Polaritons
C. The Metallic Nanosphere: Localized Surface Plasmons
D. Optical Antennas
8.3 METAMATERIAL OPTICS 334
A. Metamaterials
B. Metasurfaces
*8.4 TRANSFORMATION OPTICS 343
А. Transformation Optics
В. Invisibility Cloaks
ра ~~“
Paul Karl Ludwig Drude Viktor Georgievich Veselago Sir John Pendry (born 1943),
(1863-1906), a German physi- (born 1929), a Russian physi- a British theoretical physicist,
cist, worked toward integrating — cist, established theoretically in | showed in 2000 that a slab of
optics with Maxwell’s electro- the 1960s that materials whose _negative-index material acts as
magnetics. He forged a theory, electric permittivity and mag- _a lens with theoretically perfect
commonly known as the Drude  пейс permeability were both focus. In 2006, he proposed the
model, for describing the be- negative would exhibit unex- _ use of transformation optics for
havior of electrons in metals. pected and unusual properties. _ creating invisibility cloaks.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
303

CSC
Visible light cannot propagate through highly conductive media such as metals. When
a light beam crosses the boundary into such a medium, its intensity rapidly diminishes
within a short distance known as the penetration depth, which can be substantially
smaller than a wavelength. A metallic surface acts rather like a mirror from which
light is fully reflected back into the contiguous dielectric medium whence it came.

In the previous chapters of this book, metallic components have indeed played the
role of simple mirrors. It turns out, however, that metals can support light waves,
provided that they travel along the boundaries of the metal, in regions confined to sub-
wavelength dimensions. Such light waves travel along a metal surface in the form of a
guided surface wave. It may propagate on, but not in, metal wires, and it may be guided
by subwavelength metallic structures configured as integrated-photonic circuits. Such
structures may also serve as resonators within which light may be confined, or from
which light can scatter strongly at specific resonance frequencies.

Advances in nanotechnology permit such subwavelength metallic structures to be
embedded and distributed within dielectric materials to form synthetic photonic ma-
terials known as metamaterials. Unavailable in nature, these materials have the merit
that they may be endowed with highly useful optical properties. Metamaterials offer
numerous novel applications and have come to play an important role in photonics.

Metals and metamaterials possess a number of unique optical characteristics:

= A metal—dielectric boundary can serve as a waveguide that supports an optical

wave traveling along the boundary. Such a surface wave, known as a surface
plasmon polariton (SPP), is highly confined to the vicinity of the boundary and
is accompanied by an electric-charge-density longitudinal wave (a plasma wave)
of the same frequency that concomitantly travels along the metal surface. The
tight confinement and short wavelength of SPPs can provide a significant increase
in local field intensity. Biosensing applications are predicated on the sensitivity of
the SPP to the properties of the surrounding dielectric media.

= Metallic structures of subwavelength dimensions (e.g., nanospheres) embedded

in dielectric media support plasmonic oscillations at their boundaries. These os-
cillations, called localized surface plasmons (LSPs), exhibit resonance when
the excitation frequency matches the resonance frequency of the structure, which
typically falls in the visible or ultraviolet region of the spectrum. As a result of
resonantly enhanced absorption and scattering, such nanoparticles can exhibit
intense colors in the visible, both in transmission and reflection. This metal-
optics technology, known as plasmonics, finds use in applications ranging from
fabricating stained glass to probing the dielectric properties of a host medium.

= Metallic nanostructures may be fabricated in the form of circuit elements and

nanoantennas that are analogous to their radiowave and microwave counterparts,
but that operate in the infrared and visible. This plasmonics technology seeks to
couple the domains of highly integrated compact electronics (dimensions < 100
nm) and optical-frequency ultrafast photonics (bandwidths > 100 THz), and is
expected to find use in applications such as intrachip interconnects.

= An array of metallic structures printed at the boundary between two dielectric

media creates a metasurface, which exhibits unique optical properties that are
dictated by the shape of the elements and the geometrical configuration of the
array. Behaving much like arrays of optical antennas, metasurfaces bend light
in unusual ways that do not obey the ordinary laws of reflection and refraction
prevailing at dielectric boundaries.

= Materials with embedded metallic and dielectric structures of subwavelength di-

mensions, distributed at wavelength or subwavelength distances throughout the
volume, exhibit novel electrical and magnetic properties that result from electric
304

CHAPTER 8 METALAND METAMATERIAL OPTICS 305
charges and currents induced in the constituent conductive metal components.
Such metamaterials may be engineered to exhibit remarkable optical properties
such as negative refractive index, whereby a negative angle of refraction is
imparted at a boundary with a conventional dielectric medium.

= Metamaterials may be designed with spatially varying (graded) properties that

transform optical waves in unusual ways so that they can, for example, wrap
around objects and render them invisible. A particularly intriguing application
is optical cloaking.

The optical properties of metals and metamaterials are described by the electromag-
netic theory of light introduced in Chapter 5, just as for dielectric media. The principal
distinction is that the electric permittivity « and the magnetic permeability р may
take on negative values for metals and metamaterials. Materials in which one of these
parameters is negative are referred to as single-negative (SNG) media, while those in
which both are negative are known as double-negative (DNG) media. Conventional
lossless dielectric media are double-positive (DPS) media.

This Chapter

The chapter opens with an introductory section that examines some of the optical
properties of SNG and DNG media (Sec. 8.1). The existence of surface guided waves
at a DPS-SNG boundary is demonstrated, negative refraction at a DPS-DNG bound-
ary is highlighted, and some of the potential applications of negative-refractive-index
materials are described.

Section 8.2 provides an introduction to metal optics and plasmonics. It begins by
presenting a physical model for the optics of metals, the Drude model, and shows
that a metal can behave as a SNG material under certain conditions. SPP waves at a
metal—dielectric boundary are examined. The Rayleigh scattering of light from a metal
nanosphere is considered and contrasted with Rayleigh scattering from a dielectric
sphere (as discussed in Sec. 5.6B). Optical antennas are briefly described.

Section 8.3 considers metamaterial optics. It deals with the various shapes and
organizational patterns of metal objects that can be embedded in a dielectric medium,
or on a dielectric surface, to endow it with particular macroscopic properties: €(w) and
4(w) with real and imaginary components of desired signs. Of special interest is the
design of negative-refractive-index media.

Section 8.4 introduces transformation optics, a mathematical tool that facilitates the
design of special graded optical materials that guide light along desired trajectories.
The goal is often to fabricate metamaterials that effect a desired result, such as creating
trajectories that bypass an object so that it is rendered invisible (cloaked).

Since metamaterial optics, one of the principal topics of this chapter, involves the
interaction of light with components of subwavelength (nanometer) scale, it lies in
the domain of nanophotonics, also called nano-optics. Previous chapters, in contrast,
have focused principally on the propagation of light through dielectric materials and
components with dimensions substantially greater than the wavelength of light, which
is the domain of bulk optics.

Upcoming chapters on guided-wave optics (Chapter 9), fiber optics (Chapter 10),
and resonator optics (Chapter 11), have traditionally dealt with light propagating
through structures whose dimensions are of the order of micrometers, a domain
known as micro-optics. In recent years, however, the reach of nano-optics, via
plasmonics, has penetrated these domains, as illustrated by the following examples:
The ability of metal—dielectric structures to support surface plasmon polaritons at
subwavelength spatial scales has led to the use of plasmonic waveguides, as reported
in Chapter 9. Similarly, the ability of metallic structures of subwavelength dimensions
to support localized surface plasmons at their boundaries with dielectrics has led to
the development of plasmonic resonators and plasmonic nanolasers, considered in
Chapters 11 and 18, respectively.

306 — СНАРТЕВ8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA

As described in Chapter 5, the propagation of an electromagnetic wave through a linear,
isotropic medium is governed by the electric permittivity « and magnetic permeability
р of the material. In general, these quantities are frequency-dependent and complex-
valued. Wave properties, such as the propagation constant, velocity, attenuation coeffi-
cient, impedance, and dispersion relation, can be readily determined from е and ju. The
signs of the real and imaginary components of е and p at a given frequency govern the
various regimes of wave propagation:

= For media in which д is real and positive (indicating that there is neither magnetic

absorption nor amplification), the wave-propagation characteristics depend on the
signs of the real and imaginary parts of €, as set forth in Chapter 5:

— If € is real, the medium exhibits neither dielectric absorption nor gain (it is
lossless and passive), and waves propagate without attenuation, as described
in Secs. 5.1-5.4.

— In the presence of absorption (Sec. 5.5), € is complex and Im{e} = e€” is
negative, but Re{e} = ¢’ can be either positive or negative. For the resonant
medium described in Sec. 5.5C, for example, the imaginary part of the elec-
tric susceptibility, ш{х} = x”, is negative (see Fig. 5.5-6) and therefore
so too is Е” = ey”. The behavior of the real part of the susceptibility x’,
also displayed in Fig. 5.5-6, is such that е’ = e,(1 + y’) is positive for
frequencies below the resonance frequency but may be negative above the
resonance frequency.

— For an active medium that exhibits gain, such as a laser medium, Хх” is
positive (gain represents negative absorption; see Sec. 15.1A). In this case,
Е" is positive, while с’ may be either positive or negative.

= Similarly, for media with real and positive е, the magnetic properties, described

by р, dictate the nature of wave propagation. Magnetic media, including media
with metal components that carry induced electric currents and generate magnetic
fields, generally have complex values of jz, with real and imaginary parts that may
be either positive or negative.

= In the most general case, the manner in which the signs of the real and imaginary

components of е and д dictate the characteristics of wave propagation is more
subtle.

In the exposition that follows, we confine ourselves principally to lossless and pas-
sive media, in which there is neither absorption nor gain, indicating that we are, for
example, away from dielectric and magnetic resonances. Under these circumstances,
both е and р are real, and their signs may be positive or negative at a given frequency.
Four regimes ensue:

= Double-positive (DPS) materials (both е and wp are pos- Г?

itive). These materials are transparent and have positive
refractive index. Ordinary dielectric media fall into this DPS
category.

= Single-negative (SNG) materials (either с or [4 is negative). 0 =

These materials are opaque but they support optical surface mares

waves at boundaries with DPS materials. As will become

apparent in Sec. 8.2, metals such as gold and silver exhibit

negative с while maintaining positive и in the infrared DPS, ЗМС, and DNG
and visible spectral regions. Ferrites have positive « and "а are defined by
negative /л at microwave frequencies. the signs of с and р.

= Double-negative (ОМС) materials (both ес and yz are negative). These materials,

also called left-handed media for reasons that will become apparent in the sequel,

8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA — 307
are transparent and have negative refractive index, signifying that the application
of Snell’s law at a DPS-DNG boundary results in a negative angle of refrac-
tion. The ramifications of this property for optical components with multiple
boundaries are most interesting. Metamaterials may be designed to exhibit such
properties in specific frequency bands.

We begin by examining the optical properties of linear, lossless, passive media in
the DPS, SNG, and DNG regimes. The ramifications of the presence of loss ina DNG
medium are considered at the end of Sec. 8.1A. Initially we pay little heed to whether
such media exist naturally or must be fabricated synthetically; this issue is addressed
in Secs. 8.2 and 8.3.

A. Wave Propagation in SNG and DNG Media

The propagation of a monochromatic electromagnetic wave in a linear, homogeneous,
and isotropic medium with electric permittivity « and magnetic permeability ps is de-
scribed in Secs. 5.3 and 5.4. Maxwell’s equations (5.3-12)—(5.3-15), along with the
Helmholtz equation (5.3-16), are applicable for arbitrary complex е and jz, regardless
of the signs of their real and imaginary parts.

For simplicity, we consider a monochromatic plane wave with electric and mag-
netic complex-amplitude vectors given by Е(г) = Ep exp(—jk-r) and H(r) =
Hy exp(—jk . г), respectively, and with wavevector К. Maxwell’s equations then re-
quire

kx Eo = wpHo, (8.1-2)
in accordance with (5.4-1)-(5.4-4). The associated wavenumber (magnitude of the
vector k) is

k=w/ep, (8.1-3)
and the impedance (ratio of the magnitudes of Ро and Но) is given by
n= TH = ‘Es (8.1-4)
k €
as specified in (5.4-5). Equation (8.1-1) indicates that Ед is orthogonal to both К and
Но, while (8.1-2) indicates that Но is orthogonal to both К and Eg, so that the three
vectors form a mutually orthogonal set. For fixed orthogonal directions of the fields Eg
and Hp, the wavevector k is thus orthogonal to the plane defined by these field vectors,
but its actual direction depends on the signs of € and ju, as we shall see shortly.

Since К is in general complex, we write К = В — jy, where В and ¥ are real, so that

B-jy =wr/ep. (8.1-5)
The propagation constant 3 = w/c determines both the wave velocity c = c,/n and
the refractive index п, whereas ¥ represents the field attenuation coefficient (y = $a,
where a is the intensity attenuation coefficient; see Sec. 5.5A).

We now consider the implications of these equations for media in which е and ju are
real, where either or both may be negative.

308 — СНАРТЕВ8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
DPS Medium
The double-positive (DPS) medium provides a simple and familiar benchmark. Both е
and д are positive, so that А and 77 are real, whereupon
y=0, Bank, n=,/—*, n= ff. (8.1-6)
Eo Мо €
As discussed in Sec. 5.4A, such media support transverse electromagnetic (TEM)
waves for which the vectors Eo, Ho, and К are mutually orthogonal and form a right-
handed system, as illustrated in Fig. 8.1-1(а). The Poynting vector 8 = $Ep x HG
points along the same direction as the wave vector k, and the intensity of the wave
(power flow per unit area) is given by I = Ве{5} = | Eo|?/2n.
SNG Medium
In a single-negative (SNG) medium, either € or js 15 negative so that К and 7 are both
imaginary, whereupon (8.1-5) provides
. ПШ
я=ом Ш, — В=0, n= (8.1-7)
These parameters correspond to an exponentially decaying field that behaves as
exp(—7yz), where 2 is the propagation distance. Since В = 0, a SNG medium does
not support propagating waves. The optical intensity is attenuated by the factor e~*
at a depth d, = 1/2y = Л./4” \/|Е/в||и/мо|. The quantity d, is known as the
penetration depth or skin depth. The imaginary impedance 17 indicates that there
is a 7/2 phase shift between the electric and magnetic fields. Moreover, the Poynting
vector S = то х Ну is imaginary so that the intensity J = Ве{5} = 0, indicating
that no power is transported through such a medium.
DNG Medium
In a double-negative (DNG) medium, both с and д are negative so that (8.1-5) leads to
К = wy/|e|||, which is real, whereupon
7=0, В = пКо, п = — Fel la п = Ш (8.1-8)
бо Мо le|
indicating that the refractive index is negative. Since 7 = 0, the medium sustains wave
propagation without attenuation. The choice of signs for the square roots in (8.1-8)
is established by examining the directions of the vectors Eo, Ho, and К, which may
be determined directly from Maxwell’s equations. For the DNG medium, (8.1-1) and
(8.1-2) yield
kx Hp = wie| Eo (8.1-9)
k x Eo = —w |u| Ho. (8.1-10)
As with the DPS medium, the vectors Eo, Ho, and К are mutually orthogonal. How-
ever, the reversal of signs in (8.1-9) and (8.1-10), relative to those in (8.1-1) and (8.1-2)
1 The penetration depth is sometimes defined as the distance over which the field, rather than the intensity, is
attenuated by a factor e~', in which case dy, = 1/7.

8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA = 309
for the DPS medium, is tantamount to exchanging the roles of the electric and magnetic
fields.

Figure 8.1-1 illustrates the directions of flow of the wavefronts and power in DPS
and DNG media. Comparing Figs. 8.1-1(a) and (с), it is apparent that Eo, Ho, and К in
a DPS medium form the usual right-handed set of vectors, whereas in a DNG medium
they form a left-handed set (the medium is then said to be left-handed). This has
profound implications since it signifies that in a ОМС medium the complex Poynting
vector S = $Ep x H introduced in (5.3-10) is antiparallel to the wavevector k. Since
the impedance 77 positive, the wavenumber К is taken to be negative, and therefore so
too is the refractive index n, as stipulated in (8.1-8). The DNG material is therefore a
negative-index material (NIM). The implications of negative refractive index will be
considered in Sec. 8.1B.

k k k
$ 5 5
DPS medium DNG medium
(a) (d) (c)

Figure 8.1-1 (a) Plane wave propagating in an ordinary double-positive (DPS) medium. The
vectors E, H, and k form a right-handed set and the wavefronts travel in the same direction as the
power flow. (6) Plane wave propagating in a double-negative (DNG) medium. The vectors Е, H, and
k form a left-handed set and the wavefronts travel in a direction opposite to that of the power flow.
(c) Equivalent representation to that depicted in (b), obtained by effecting a 90° rotation about the
horizontal (S and k) axis that renders E vertical, followed by a 180° rotation about the new vertical
(E) axis.
Media with Complex « and и
The prospects of е and и both being real and negative at some frequency are remote.
For example, if both parameters are described by a resonant-medium model, such as
that considered in Sec. 5.5C, then throughout the frequency range over which the real
part is negative, the imaginary part cannot be zero, by virtue of the Kramers—Kronig
relations (see Sec. 5.5B and Sec. B.1 of Appendix В). It turns out, however, that left-
handedness, and thus negative refractive index, can be exhibited in conjunction with
absorption.

For absorptive media, « = ¢' + je” and и = p’ + jp” are complex with negative
imaginary parts с” and д”, respectively. We now demonstrate that if the real parts,
e’ and р’, are both negative, the medium is indeed left-handed even for nonvanishing
Е" and м”. As previously, consider a wave exp(—jz) exp(—yz) with positive 7 so
that it decays along the +z direction. The Propagation constant В may be obtained by
writing (8.1-5) in the form (8 — jy)? = w*(e + je”) (м + ju) and then matching the
imaginary parts to obtain 2y8 = w?(—p"e' — ey’). If both с’ and и’ are negative, then
В is negative, and so too is the refractive index. The wavefront then travels in the —z
direction, opposite to the direction of decay. We now proceed to show that the power
flow is always in the same direction as the power decay, so that the direction of the
wavevector is opposite to that of the power flow and the medium is left-handed.

Power flow is determined by the Poynting vector Re{3E x H*}. Since Ро = nH,
where 7 = \/,/e is the characteristic impedance, and since Re{7} is always positive
for passive media, the power flow must be in the +z direction for the field configuration

310 — CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
shown in Fig. 8.1-1(c). It can be explicitly shown that Re{n} > 0 by writing arg{n} =
т (аге{и} — arg{e}); since с” and м” are both negative, we have 7 < arg{e} < 2”
and 7 < arg{y} < 27 whereupon —47 < arg{n} < $7 so that Re{n} > 0.

Although the condition that the real part of both Е and д be negative is sufficient
for achieving left handedness, it is not necessary. It is possible for left-handedness to
be exhibited for an absorptive medium with only one of the two parameters, ¢’ or pi’,
being negative, indicating that the class of left-handed media transcends that of double-
negative media. The definitive necessary and sufficient condition for left-handedness
turns out to Бе!

ЕЕ ин < 0. (8.1-11)
Materials for which both е and yu are real, but only one is negative, do not satisfy (8.1-
11) and therefore cannot be left-handed. Nor do media for which one of the material
parameters, е or ju, is real and positive, whatever the real and imaginary values of the
other. It is clear, then, that nonmagnetic materials cannot be left-handed.
B. Waves at Boundaries Between DPS, SNG, and DNG Media
We now consider waves at boundaries between DPS and SNG media, and between
DPS and DNG media.
Reflection at a DPS-SNG Boundary
A wave from an ordinary DPS medium that impinges on its boundary with a SNG
medium is fully reflected since it cannot propagate through the latter. Since the
impedance of the DPS medium is real, and that of the SNG medium is imaginary,
the magnitude of the reflection coefficient must be unity (see Sec. 6.2). Such reflection
is accompanied by the creation of an evanescent field in the SNG medium; this bears a
resemblance to total internal reflection at the boundary between two dielectric (DPS)
media. However, total internal reflection occurs only for angles of incidence greater
than the critical angle whereas reflection at the DPS—SNG boundary is total regardless
of the angle of incidence, as illustrated in Fig. 8.1-2. Reflection at the DPS-SNG
boundary is therefore more akin to that at a perfect mirror.
- 77 »
My os “%, Ss”
DPS t}] \\\ р DPS Lin “4
DPS SNG и
(а) (b)

Figure 8.1-2 (а) Total internal reflection at a boundary between two DPS media takes place for
angles of incidence greater than the critical angle @,. (b) Total reflection at a DPS-SNG boundary
occurs for all angles of incidence. In both cases, an evanescent wave is created in the vicinity of the
boundary.

1 See В. А. Depine and A. Lakhtakia, А New Condition to Identify Isotropic Dielectric-Magnetic Materials
Displaying Negative Phase Velocity, Microwave and Optical Technology Letters, vol. 41, pp. 315-316, 2004.

8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA 311
Surface Waves at a DPS-SNG Boundary
In the limit of grazing incidence (angle of incidence approaching 90°) at a DPS-SNG
boundary, a surface wave may be created that propagates along the boundary but is
evanescent on both sides of it. As a specific example, consider the boundary between
a medium with positive electric permittivity «; (medium 1) and another with nega-
tive permittivity €2 (medium 2). Both media are assumed to have the same (positive)
magnetic permeability jz and both are lossless and passive so that ет, €2, and pare real.

We proceed to demonstrate that such a DPS—SNG boundary can support a surface
guided wave that travels along the boundary without changing its shape, as illustrated
in Fig. 8.1-3(a). We assume that the wave is a TM wave, for which the magnetic field
is parallel to the boundary and orthogonal to the direction of propagation. Each of the
three field components H,, Е, and E, varies as

exp(—y1y) exp(—jGz), y > 0 (medium 1) (8.1-12)
ехр(+72у) exp(—jGz), у< 0 (medium 2), (8.1-13)
where ( is a common propagation constant and yy, and 72 are positive field extinction
coefficients. To satisfy the Helmholz equation (5.3-16) in each medium, we must have
1 + 8? Supe, 79+ 8? = але. (8.1-14)
YA x у ыы Ay,
DPS в >0 Ez E
dy
2 £ 3 |
ПЕН 2 РА
SNG © <0 °
A
(a) (6) (с)
Figure 8.1-3 (a) Schematic representation of an optical surface wave traveling along the boundary
between a medium of positive electric permittivity (DPS medium, such as a dielectric material)
and another of negative permittivity (SNG medium, such as a metal below the plasma frequency).
The associated longitudinal surface-charge wave is shown in dark blue; the width of each segment
represents its wavelength, which is given by 27/{. (b) The electric field Е’, as a function of the
distance y from the boundary. (c) Electric and magnetic field lines and the associated charge. The
plasmon wave penetrates to a depth d, and 4> in the DPS and SNG media, respectively, and extends
a distance d}, along the boundary.

The amplitudes of the three field components in each medium are related by
Maxwell’s equations, and the amplitudes in different media are related by the boundary
conditions. Since the H,, component must be continuous, this component has a
common amplitude, say Но, in both media. Maxwell’s equations (8.1-1) dictate
that the amplitudes of the Е, components in the two media are (—3/we,)Ho and
(—G/we2) Но. The condition that D, = ¢F,, is continuous at the boundary is therefore
automatically satisfied. The amplitudes of the Е. components are (—y1/jwe1)Ho
in medium 1 and (72/jwe2)Ho in medium 2. Since the Е, components must be
continuous at the boundary, it follows that

= 2. (8.1-15)

Ey €2
Because 7; and 2 are positive, this can only be attained if е!1 and €2 have opposite
signs. We therefore conclude that such a surface wave cannot exist at the boundary

312 — СНАРТЕВ8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
between two media with positive electric permittivities, but may exist if the media
have electric permittivities of opposite sign.

Since еЁ/ is continuous and е changes sign at the boundary, Е, must also reverse
sign at the boundary, as shown in Fig. 8.1-3(b). This in turn requires the existence of
surface electric charge in the form of a charge-density longitudinal wave that oscillates
at the optical frequency w. The field lines and the charge distribution are illustrated
in Fig. 8.1-3(c). The combination of the charge-density wave and the optical wave is
known as a surface plasmon polariton (SPP).

The properties of the SPP surface wave may be deduced from 7; and ‘ya, in accord-
ance with (8.1-14):

В = пъКо, Ny = (2. & = 9, (8.1-16)
бо €1 + €2
2 2

m=) he =, (8.1-17)
€o(e1 + €2) €o(€1 + €2) SPP Wave
DPS-SNG Boundary
where Ко = w,/€, И is the free-space wavenumber; and пь and сь are, respectively,
the refractive index and electric permittivity associated with the SPP (the subscript
“b” signifies “boundary”). For the surface wave to be a traveling wave, В must be
real, which requires that сь be positive. This is possible only if |е2| > в, in which
case the SPP surface wave exists. This same condition also renders y; and 72 positive,
as required. The properties of the surface wave, summarized below, are substantially

influenced by the ratio |e2|/e1:

= The velocity is c,/np, and the propagation wavelength, called the plasmon wave-

length, is Ло/пь. If |e2| ви, then ny is large, the wave is slow, and the plasmon
wavelength is much smaller than the free-space wavelength Ло.

= The field extinction coefficient in the SNG medium, 72, is greater than that in

the ОМС medium, 7, by the factor |е2|/е1, which is greater than unity. The
penetration depth in the SNG medium, dz = 1/279, is therefore always smaller
than that in the DPS medium, 4: = 1/24, by the same factor, as depicted in
Fig. 8.1-3. If |е2| = «1, then €; + €g is small and both penetration depths are
significantly smaller than the free-space wavelength Ло so that the SPP is highly
confined to the boundary. This is a remarkable property that can be exploited in
many applications.

= The optical power flow in the two media may be determined from Re{S}, where

8 = 3E х Н* is the complex Poynting vector [see (5.3-10)]. Since the com-
ponents H, and Е. are out of phase by 90°, there is no power flow in the у
direction. The power flows in the z and —z directions in the DPS and SNG media,
respectively, with intensities given by the magnitude of Re{S}:
п = 5=—|Hol? exp(-2nry), Ву) = 5 |Hol? exp(+2n2y). 84-18)
ие 2 62|

ТА plasma is a collection of positive ions and Нее electrons whose overall net charge is approximately
zero. A plasmon is a quasiparticle (a quantum) of the plasma oscillation, just as a photon is a quantum of
the electromagnetic field. A polariton is a quasiparticle that results from the coupling of the electromagnetic
field (photons) with the electric or magnetic excitation of a material. Surface plasmon polaritons result from the
coupling of photons with surface plasmons.

8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA 313
The powers in the two media (areas under the [;(y) and [2(y) distributions) are:
В В
P, = —^ Но}, P, = —^ Но}, (8.1-19)
4wery1 Aw €2|Y2
so that the net power flow P; — Р> is proportional to [(e1y1)~! — (|625) 1,
which, in view of (8.1-15), is proportional to (е2 — €?). Therefore, in the limit of
|eg| & €1, the net power flow approaches zero.
EXAMPLE 8.1-1. SPP Wave. The boundary between two media with equal (positive) mag-
netic permeabilities и1 = 2, and with permittivities «; = 1.41 во and е› = —47 во, supports a SPP
wave at a free-space wavelength Л. = 1000 nm with the following characteristics:
пь = 1.206, Ло/пь = 829.4nm, d,=38l.lum, 42 = 11.43 nm.
ААА Дрим с  ДЮМИМИ—=—=Ц—————="..—.„.„„
Summary: SPP Waves at a DPS-SNG Boundary
If the condition —е2 > в! is satisfied, the boundary between a DPS medium and
a SNG medium with negative permittivity supports a TM optical surface wave
along with an associated longitudinal surface-charge wave; the combination is
a surface plasmon polariton (SPP). Because the penetration depths of the SPP
into the two media are substantially smaller than an optical wavelength, the SPP
is tightly confined to the boundary, resulting in a significant increase in local
field intensity. The SPP has the distinct merit that it can be manipulated at the
nanometer spatial scale while oscillating at an optical frequency. Using a similar
analysis, it can be shown that the boundary between a DPS medium and a SNG
medium with negative permeability supports a TE surface wave if the condition
—[2 > fy is satisfied. It can also be shown, as illustrated diagrammatically in
Fig. 8.1-4, that the boundary between two SNG media may support a surface
wave if €; and ео are of opposite signs, js; and /и2 are also of opposite signs, and
a number of other conditions on the magnitudes of these parameters are satisfied.
Surface waves are not supported at the boundary between two DPS media nor at
the boundary between two DNG media.
[2
am
4
3
==™ 5
Figure 8.1-4 The boundary between two me-
dia with real permittivities and permeabilities
=> > Be | 2 can support TM or TE surface waves for values
TE =I of the ratios е2/е1 and из/и1 that fall in the
И shaded regions. Example 8.1-1 corresponds to
| и2/ ра = Тапа €2/e, < —1.
тм ТЕ

314 — CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
SPP at boundary between DPS medium and lossy ЗМС medium. The result for a
lossless SNG medium may be extended to a lossy medium by taking е2 to be complex
(€g = © + jes), with negative real part €4, while maintaining 1 = 2 and в! real and
positive. Equations (8.1-16) and (8.1-17) for the parameters of the SPP wave in the
lossless medium remain valid with slight modifications: the parameters (, еъ, 71, and
72 become complex. Following the approach used in writing (5.5-5) and (8.1-5), we
rewrite (8.1-16) as
«Yb €b €1€2

Nb — J ko 2. €b +6 ’ (8.1 20)
where 7p is the amplitude attenuation coefficient of the traveling SPP wave. It is clear
that the SPP-wave refractive index then becomes пь = Ве{\/еь/ео }. Equation (8.1-
20) can be used to calculate the velocity of the SPP wave c,/np, the plasmon wave-
length Ло/пь, the intensity attenuation coefficient a, = 2 7p, and the propagation
length dy = 1/ay = 1/2 yp. Equation (8.1-17) can be used to calculate the complex
parameters 7, and 55, from which the penetration depths on both sides of the boundary,
41 = 1/2Re{y} and dz = 1/2 Re{72}, may be determined. The dimensions of the
plasmon wave are 41 and 45 in the transverse direction, and аъ along the boundary.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 8.1-2. SPP at Gold-Si;N, Interface. Ага free-space wavelength A, = 1000
nm, the permittivities of $13 М4 and gold are «, = 1.41, and е2 = (—47 + 13.4) еь, respectively.
These values are identical to those set forth in Example 8.1-1 except that we now accommodate а
small imaginary component of €2. Ап SPP wave propagating at the gold-SisN, interface thus has
approximately the same values of пь, di, and dz as those cited in Example 8.1-1. The propagation
length, on the other hand, is determined by the imaginary component of € via

dy = 1/2y% = Ao /4aIm{ Ven /eo } - (8.1-21)
With the help of (8.1-20) we obtain
&/€o = 1.453 + 7 0.003234 sothat /e,/e, = 1.206 + 0.001341,

which leads to 4ь = 59.3 wm for A, = 1 wm.
Negative Refraction at a DPS-DNG Boundary
The refraction of light at the boundary between two ordinary dielectric (DPS) media
obeys Snell’s law, пл sin 6; = п2 sin 95, which results from matching the components
of the wavevectors К! and kz along the direction of the boundary [Figs. 8.1-5(a)
and 2.4-2]. If one of the media, say medium 2, is instead a DNG medium with negative
refractive index nz then we have n; sin 6; = —|ng| sin 62, which reveals that the angle
of refraction 62 must be negative and the refracted and incident rays both lie on same
side of the normal to the boundary. This outcome also can be understood as arising
from matching the components of the wavevectors К! and ko along the direction of the
boundary [Fig. 8.1-5(6)].

It is thus clear that the optics of planar boundaries and lenses is altered signifi-
cantly when a DPS medium is replaced by a DNG medium. Indeed, a convex lens
of DNG material behaves like a concave lens of DPS material, and vice-versa. Also
unexpected is the observation that a planar boundary between positive- and negative-
index materials possesses focusing power, as illustrated in Fig. 8.1-6(a) for the special
case п2 = —пл, which provides 05 = —@,. The planar boundary then acts on optical
rays in the same way as does a convex spherical boundary between two DPS media,
as depicted in Fig. 1.2-13: it forms an uninverted image with unity magnification.
Moreover, for DPS and DNG media with permittivities and permeabilities that have
the same magnitudes (eg = —e€, and из = —и1), the impedances 71 = \/рл/е1 and

8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA 315
ny >0 Ny >O п: >0 Ny <0
Е 2)
QA ОО Пи 6 SSG ain
a |
(a) \ (b) \ | ИЕ
Figure 8.1-5 (а) Refraction at the boundary between two positive-index media. The directions of
52 and К2 are the same. (6) Refraction at the boundary between positive- and negative-index media.
The directions of 52 and К. are opposite. In both cases, the projections of the wavevectors К! and ky
along the boundary are equal in magnitude and parallel in direction.
72 = \/И2/е2 are of equal magnitude and sign, so that no reflection occurs at the
boundary, at any inclination, regardless of the polarization.
NIM Slab as a Near-Field Imaging System
A slab of ОМС material (NIM) with parameters е = —во, ий = —Uo, n = —1, and
7 = Mo, located in free space, acts as a lens. As illustrated in Fig. 8.1-6(b), each of
the two DPS-DNG boundaries has focusing power so that one image is formed inside
the slab and another beyond it. For a slab of width do, the imaging equation is simply
а1 + 42 = do. Since the impedances match at the boundaries, no reflection occurs and
the NIM slab has unity transmittance.
DPS п |-n ОМС у | n=l yea n=1
i ae n=l ropagating|Wave |
| | | |
| 3 2, (©) | Evanescent Wave
dl о 3,
© & = |;
кана а фФ- а Ф-
(@) ©) al fe == |
| | |
Figure 8.1-6 (а) Focusing of rays by a boundary between DPS and ОМС media with refractive
indices of equal magnitudes. The boundary forms an upright image inside the ОМС medium. (5)
Image formation using a slab with negative index n = —1 in free space. Each boundary has focusing
power so that images are formed both inside and outside the slab. (c) Transmission of a propagating
wave (spatial frequency smaller than the inverse wavelength), and an evanescent wave (spatial
frequency greater than the inverse wavelength), through the slab. (d) The amplitude of an evanescent
wave associated with a harmonic component of an object distribution with spatial frequency greater
than the inverse wavelength is attenuated in free space but is amplified by the DNG medium so that
its amplitude is restored in the image plane. A semilogarithmic sketch is provided.

316  CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS

As an imaging system, the NIM slab also has the remarkable property of forming
an image of the object field distribution with subwavelength resolution, 1.е., it offers
imaging details finer than the wavelength (i.e., spatial frequencies greater than the
inverse wavelength). As explained in Sec. 4.4D, imaging systems that make use of
ordinary optics cannot transmit these high spatial frequencies since they correspond to
attenuated evanescent waves. This remarkable property of the NIM slab means that, in
principle, it is a “perfect lens” (also called a “superlens’).*

The NIM slab offers resolution that exceeds the diffraction limit, as we now demon-
strate with the help of the Fourier-optics approach described in Chapter 4. Referring to
the illustration provided in Fig. 8.1-6(c), the transfer function for the propagation of a
wave a distance d, through free space is

Hi (vy, Vy) = exp(—jkzdi), kz = \/k2 —k2 — № = 20y/~? — v2 — v7,

(8.1-22)
where (Vz, Vy) = (ky/27,ky/27) are the spatial frequencies [see (4.1-9)]. Similarly,
propagation a distance dp through а DNG medium is described by the transfer function
Ho(vz,Vy) = exp(—jkido), where К, = —k,. The third segment of the imaging
system portrayed in Fig. 8.1-6(c) is propagation a distance dz through free space, which
has the transfer function H2(v,, vy) = exp(—jkzd2). The overall transfer function of
this imaging system is thus the product H = H,H jH2. When the imaging equation
d,+d2 = dois satisfied, H becomes unity, which reveals that the system is an all-pass
spatial filter and hence provides “perfect” imaging.

However, these three transfer functions have distinctly different behaviors for spatial
frequencies that lie below and above \~! (1.е., for spatial frequencies smaller and larger
than those for which kz + ky = kz; see Fig. 4.1-11). Below A~', the quantities under
the square-root signs in (8.1-22) are positive so that all transfer functions are phase
factors. In this domain, the phase of the function Но has a sign opposite to those of the
free-space functions H, and H2 so that the NIM phase factor compensates the phase
shifts introduced by the two stretches of free space. The net result is a propagating
wave [Fig. 8.1-6(c)].

For spatial frequencies larger than \~', in contrast, the wavevector components*
К. and К, = —k, become imaginary, к. = —j\/k2 +k? —k2 = —j2n,/v2 +02 —d~,
whereupon
H, = exp(—7d1), Hz = exp(—yd2), Ho = exp(t+ydo), y = 2” \/и2 + и? — А ?,

(8.1-23)
where ¥ is real. The factors H; and H2 then represent attenuated evanescent waves,
whereas Но represents an amplified evanescent wave. Consequently, the high spatial
frequencies that are severely attenuated by propagation through free space, both before
and after the slab, are amplified by an equal factor in the DNG medium, and are
therefore fully restored [Fig. 8.1-6(d)]. Amplification of the evanescent wave in the
NIM is not inconsistent with conservation of energy.

While the perfect restoration of an evanescent field that has diminished significantly
as a result of exponential decay is possible in principle, slight energy dissipation in the
NIM slab (evidenced by a small imaginary part of € ог и) may thwart the restoration
process. The distance from the object to the slab, the thickness of the slab, and the
overall distance between the object and image planes, must be small in comparison
with the wavelength, particularly if the spatial frequencies to be recovered are much

1 See J.B. Pendry, Negative Refraction Makes a Perfect Lens, Physical Review Letters, vol. 85, рр. 3966-3969,
2000.

* The choice of the minus sign for kz, which is allowed by virtue of (4.1-3), ensures consistency with the
development provided in Sec. 4.1B.

8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA = 317
higher than the inverse wavelength. This requirement means that the NIM slab is a
near-field imaging system.
Far-field imaging with subwavelength resolution. However, evanescent waves re-
stored in the near field of the DNG slab may be converted into propagating waves,
which can then be used to produce an image in the far field. This conversion may
be implemented by making use of a periodic element of high spatial frequency, such
as a nanoscale corrugation on the exit surface of the slab, as illustrated in Fig. 8.1-7.
When an evanescent wave exp(—jk,x) of high spatial frequency k, is modulated by
a harmonic function exp(jqx) of high spatial frequency а, the result is a propagating
wave exp[—j (kz —¢q)’] of lower spatial frequency |k,,—q|, provided that |k,,—q| < ko.
The far-field image formed by the downconverted spatial frequencies may, in principle,
be processed to obtain a perfect replica of the original spatial distribution.
| | Е \
| = \
| | .
| Fs НР ВУ wave —_ = Propagating wave
| =

(а) (5)
Figure 8.1-7 (а) Ап evanescent wave restored by а DNG slab attenuates in air beyond the near
field. (b) An evanescent wave restored by a NIM slab can be converted into a propagating wave by
making use of a periodic surface (grating) at the boundary.
*C. Hyperbolic Media

Anisotropic media may have permittivity and permeability tensors with positive or
negative principal values. The designation of the medium as DPS, SNG, or DNG is
then dependent on the direction of propagation of the wave as well as on its polar-
ization. To demonstrate one facet of this rich behavior, we consider media endowed
with isotropic magnetic properties and positive permeability р, but with anisotropic
dielectric properties.

Wave propagation in anisotropic media was described in Sec. 6.3 for media with
positive principal values of the electric permittivity tensor е, namely ет, €2 and ез. If
these parameters take on mixed signs instead, wave propagation exhibits a number of
unusual properties. For simplicity, we consider the special case of a uniaxial medium
with €; = €2 > 0, and compare wave propagation in media with positive and negative
€3.

As shown in Sec. 6.3, the dispersion surfaces, also called the k surfaces or surfaces
of constant w(k), are, for the ordinary wave, a sphere of radius

К = ПоКо, (8.1-24)
where no = /€1/€o, and, for the extraordinary wave, a quadric surface
ki +k? ki ke
1727432, (8.1-25)
€3 €1 бо
as provided in (6.3-21) and (6.3-22), respectively.

318 — СНАРТЕВ8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
Considering the two cases at hand, we find:
= When сз is positive, the extraordinary К surface is an ellipsoid of revolution, as
displayed in Figs. 6.3-11(6) and 8.1-8(a). The ordinary and extraordinary waves
have refractive indices n, and п(0), respectively, where n(@), which is given by
(6.3-15), varies between п. and пе = \/ез/во, as the angle 0 varies between 0
and 90°.
= When сз is negative, the extraordinary К surface is instead a hyperboloid of
revolution (in two sheets), as portrayed in Fig. 8.1-8(5), and the material is known
as a hyperbolic medium. The refractive index n(@) for an extraordinary wave at
an angle 9 in the k2—-k3 plane is then given by
1 cos?@ sin? 6
Е, (8.1-26)
where ne = \/|в3|/во. Аз 0 increases from 0 to Ох = ав ((пе/по), the
refractive index n(@) increases from n, to со, аз can be discerned from Fig. 8.1-
8(b), signifying that the wavelength in the medium becomes progressively smaller
and the wave slows to a halt at 0 = Onax.
kolky Ко
| / . И = ey Me klk,
Figure 8.1-8 Contours of the К surfaces in the k2—-k3 plane for a uniaxial anisotropic medium with
principal values of the dielectric tensor €; = €2 > 0 in two cases: (a) ез > 0, and (b) ез < 0. The
contours are shown only for the extraordinary waves (for the ordinary waves, they are spheres in both
cases). (a) The К contour is an ellipse and the medium is DPS for all directions of propagation. (5)
The k contour is a hyperbola and the waves can propagate only in directions that lie within a cone
of half-angle дах. Outside this cone, the medium acts like a SNG medium, which does not support
propagating waves.
The Hyperbolic Slab as a Far-Field Imaging System with Subwavelength
Resolution
An important property of a hyperbolic medium is that for a plane wave with wavevector
components (k1, k2, k3), no matter how large k, and kg, there is a real value of k3 that
satisfies (8.1-25) when ез is negative, indicating that the wave can propagate through
the medium. This signifies that spatial frequencies greater than an inverse wavelength
in any plane do not correspond to evanescent waves, as they do for ordinary media (see
Sec. 4.1B), but rather can be transmitted over long distances. Although propagation
is accompanied by Fresnel diffraction, the hyperbolic medium has a transfer function
with no spatial frequency cutoff.
Moreover, Fresnel diffraction may be significantly reduced in a hyperbolic medium.
If no < ne, then Onax = фап` (пе/по) approaches 7/2, whereupon the hyperboloid
of revolution in Fig. 8.1-8(b) flattens and becomes approximately planar, corresponding

8.1 SINGLE- AND DOUBLE-NEGATIVE MEDIA 319
to aconstant Аз = nok, for all ky and ka. The transfer function exp(—jk3z) associated
with propagation in the slab is then independent of the spatial frequencies (ky, kz)
of the input-field distribution. A point in the input plane is thus imaged to a point
in the output plane, and propagation may be described by ray optics. The slab then
acts as perfect near-field imaging system (1.е., one with subwavelength resolution), as
illustrated in Fig. 8.1-9(a). Furthermore, the slab may be curved in such a way that the
image is geometrically magnified, as shown in Fig. 8.1-9(6). If the spatial-frequency
components of the magnified image become smaller than the inverse wavelength, they
generate propagating waves that may be captured with the help of a conventional
lens, thereby forming a far-field image. A cylindrical slab such as this is known as
a hyperlens.

| Figure 8.1-9 (a) А hyperbolic slab with
НИИ * Hyperbolic oe 0 and 0 ый Е = i” < |es| has a
BCID planar dispersion relation (kz = constant) so
3 that propagation along the optic axis (z direc-
Wr tion) is diffraction-free. (b) A hyperbolic slab
РА curved to form an inhomogeneous cylindrical
Light [Evanescent yp) structure, with the local optic axis pointing
rays wave in the radial direction, acts as a magnifier of
subwavelength details. If the details of the
Propagating magnified image are larger than the wave-
waves length, it produces propagating waves in the
(a) (b) outer medium.
Refraction at the Boundary of a Hyperbolic Medium
Refraction at a boundary between two media may be determined by drawing the k
surfaces for the two media and matching the components of k along the boundary (see,
e.g., the analysis of double refraction in Sec. 6.3E). The k surfaces for a boundary
between an isotropic DPS medium and a hyperbolic medium are shown in Fig. 8.1-
10(a), with only the extraordinary wave displayed for the hyperbolic medium.
k 90° Oe
| Million: i
niko sin 6; 9 р
|
niko sin 6; |
|
|
k; 5! \
< DPS, Isotropic Hyperbolic °0 0; 90°
(а) (6)
Figure 8.1-10 Refraction at a boundary between an isotropic DPS medium of refractive index
т; and a uniaxial hyperbolic medium with refractive indices п» and пе. (a) The К surface for the
isotropic medium is a sphere, and that for the extraordinary wave of the hyperbolic medium is a
hyperboloid of revolution. A form of negative refraction is evident since the Poynting vector S of
the incident wave points upward whereas that of the refracted wave points downward. (b) Angle of
refraction @ as a function of the angle of incidence 6; forn, = 0.8n; and п. = 1.25 п; . For the
ordinary wave, refraction occurs for angles of incidence 6; smaller than the critical angle 9. For
the extraordinary wave, refraction occurs for all angles 0;, but the angle of refraction is limited to
9 < дах.

320 — СНАРТЕВ 8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
Because the k component along the boundary for the hyperbolic medium extends
from 0 to со, it is always possible to find a match with that for any wave incident from
the DPS medium, as may be confirmed by solving the matching equation, n,; sin 0; =
n(O) sin 0, together with (8.1-26). Total internal reflection therefore does not occur at
this boundary. A plot of the angle of refraction 9 as a function of the angle of inci-
dence 0; is displayed in Fig. 8.1-10(b). This type of all-angle refraction is consistent
with the observation that the extraordinary wave in the hyperbolic medium cannot be
evanescent.
8.2 METAL OPTICS: PLASMONICS
A. Optical Properties of Metals
Conductive Media
Conductive media such as metals, semiconductors, doped dielectrics, and ionized gases
have free electric charges and an associated electric current density J. In such mate-
rials, the first of the source-free Maxwell’s equations, (5.1-7), must be modified by
including the current density J along with the displacement current density OD/0t, so
that
OD
VxH = — +4. (8.2-1)
Ot
The three other source-free Maxwell’s equations, (5.1-8)—(5.1-10), remain unmodified,
with 44 = jlo, since naturally occurring materials do not exhibit magnetic effects that
vary at optical frequencies.
For a monochromatic wave of angular frequency w, (8.2-1) takes the form
VxH=jwD+ J. (8.2-2)
If the medium has linear dielectric properties, the electric flux density is given by D =
ЕЕ = €,(1 + ХЕ. Similarly, if the medium has linear conductive properties, and the
conductivity is denoted о, the electric current density is proportional to the electric
field,
J=oE, (8.2-3)
which is a form of Ohm’s law. Under these conditions, the right-hand side of (8.2-2)
becomes (jwe + 0)E = jw(e + o/jw)E, so that
УхН = jwe.E, (8.2-4)
where the effective electric permittivity ес is given by
ее ( + =.) (8.2-5)
JWE Effective Permittivity
The effective permittivity ес is a complex, frequency-dependent parameter that repre-
sents a combination of the dielectric and conductive properties of the medium. Since
the second term in (8.2-5) varies inversely with frequency, the contribution of the
conductive component diminishes with increasing frequency.

8.2 METALOPTICS: PLASMONICS 321

Since (8.2-4) takes the same form as the analogous equation for a dielectric medium,
(5.3-12), the laws of wave propagation derived in Secs. 5.3—5.5 are applicable even in
the presence of conductivity. Hence, the wavenumber in (5.5-2) and (5.5-3) takes the
form К = 8 — jy = w,/€cflo , the impedance in (5.5-6) becomes 7 = \/Ho/€c ‚ and the
refractive index п, and field attenuation coefficient y = та in (5.5-5) are determined
from the complex equation

у + (8.2.6)
Ко о о JWE
where ky = w/o = Wy/Eoflo -

The ratio o/we in (8.2-6) has two limiting regimes. When a/we < 1, dielec-
tric effects dominate and conductive effects constitute only a minor correction to the
wavenumber. When o/we >> 1, in contrast, conductive effects dominate and © =
a /jw. We can use the Taylor-series expansion /1 +2 ~1+2/2 for x < 1, along with
the identity 7 = (1+7 /У2, to obtain approximate expressions for the wave parameters
when о is real and frequency-independent. The results are provided in Table 8.2-1 for
both limiting regimes:

Table 8.2-1 Refractive index п, attenuation coefficient a, and impedance 7 for
a medium with real-valued, frequency-independent conductivity о, in the limits
of small and large values of 7/we. These equations are not applicable when the
conductivity o is complex and/or frequency-dependent, as discussed in the next
section in connection with the Drude model.

o/we<1 a/we>1

n® V/e/€ п = 9/20 (8.2-7)
aX ov/Uo/€ а = \/2W oe (8.2-8)
nN = V/ Mo/€ ne (14+ 7)Vwpo/2o (8.2-9)

It is apparent from Table 8.2-1 that at a fixed frequency w, the attenuation coefficient
а is proportional to the conductivity о’ for small values of о’, but becomes proportional
to \/o for large values of о. The impedance 7, initially real and independent of с,
eventually acquires а 45° phase shift and becomes inversely proportional to \/o as д
becomes large. In this limit, 7 itself becomes small so that the material becomes highly
reflective at the boundary with a non-conductive medium.

For a fixed value of o at low frequencies, the refractive index n is proportional to
1/,/w, whereas the attenuation coefficient а and the impedance 77 are directly propor-
tional to \/w. As w increases to a value such that the ratio о /we becomes very small,
all three of the wave propagation parameters become frequency independent and the
material behaves as a nondispersive dielectric medium with loss.

For a perfect conductor, a —> со so that a — со and the penetration depth d, =
1/a — 0. Also, 7 — 0 so that at the boundary with a dielectric medium the power
reflectance R — 1; the material then behaves as a perfect mirror.

As discussed in the next section, the conductivities of real metals at optical fre-
quencies are often complex-valued and frequency-dependent, in which case the results
provided in Table 8.2-1 are not applicable. Under those conditions, the frequency
dependencies of the wave parameters can differ considerably from those presented
in the table.

322 — СНАРТЕВ8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
Metals: The Drude Model
When the relation between д and & is dynamic rather than static, the conductivity
o must be frequency-dependent with a finite bandwidth and a finite response time.
Treating the conduction electrons as an ideal gas of independent particles that move
freely between scattering events, the Drude model (also called the Drude—Lorentz
model) prescribes a frequency-dependent complex conductivity of the form
в
=, (8.2-10)
1+ т
where об is the low-frequency conductivity and 7 is a scattering time (or collision
time). For sufficiently low frequencies such thatw < 1/т, д = oo is real and
frequency-independent, in which case the results provided in Table 8.2-1 apply.
If the medium has free-space-like dielectric properties with no other losses (€ = во),
inserting (8.2-10) into (8.2-5) leads to a relative effective permittivity given by
2 2
€ WwW), WwW
f 44 — “ep yp} (8.2-11)
€o —w? + jw/T —w* + jul
where © = 1/т is the scattering rate (collision frequency). The plasma frequency w,
(strictly speaking, the plasma angular frequency) is defined as
a
Wy = ,/— (8.2-12)
€oT
and the free-space plasma wavelength Л, is
27
A» = —. (8.2-13)
Wp
Some lossless media exhibit dielectric properties that differ from those of free space,
as manifested by a residual frequency-independent relative permittivity 1 + y,, that
persists to frequencies w >> wp». In this case, the relative effective permittivity in (8.2-
11) becomes
2
Ес Wr
ЕТ. 8.2-14
Eo Xm To? + jul ( )
Observed values of w,, Ар, т, and © for a number of metals are provided in Table 8.2-2.
Table 8.2-2 Plasma frequency w,, free-space plasma wavelength A,, scattering
time т, and scattering rate © = 1/7, for Al, Ag, Au, and Си."
Wy (rad/s) Ap (nm) т (fs) $9
Al 1.83 x 106 103 5.10 1.96 x 10%
Ag 1.37 x 1016 138 31.3 0.32 x 1014
Au 1.35 x 106 139 9.25 1.08 x 10“
Cu 1.33 x 1016 142 6.90 1.45 x 1014
“Зее, e.g., В. J. Zeman and G. С. Schatz, An Accurate Electromagnetic Theory Study of
Surface Enhancement Factors for Ag, Au, Cu, Li, Na, Al, Ga, In, Zn, and Cd, Journal of
Physical Chemistry, vol. 91, рр. 634—643, 1987.

8.2 METAL OPTICS: PLASMONICS 323
These results are related to those for the resonant medium described by the Lorentz
oscillator model, which treats the motion of an electron bound to a nucleus as a har-
monic oscillator (see Sec. 5.5C). However, here the electrons are free and there is no
restoring force so that the elastic constant к = 0 and the resonance frequency wo =
к/т = 0. The Lorentz-model equation of motion (5.5-16) then becomes d?x/dt? +
Cdx /dt = —e€/m, and the corresponding polarization density P = — Мех obeys the
equation d?P/dt? + (dP/dt = (Ne?/m)€, where М is the electron density of the
medium. For a field oscillating at an angular frequency w, this gives rise to —w?P +
ЛСР = (Ne?/m)E, which leads to a susceptibility
P и
р
Ww) = — = — 8.2-15
x(w) <B> nw + Jw’ ( )
where
| Ne?
Wp = 4/—. (8.2-16)
вот Plasma Frequency
Drude Model
Equation (8.2-15), together with the relation ес = €,(1 + x) for a medium with free-
space dielectric properties, leads to (8.2-11) and (8.2-12), provided that
Ме?т
00 = ——. (8.2-17)
m
Equation (8.2-15) is a special case of (5.5-19) for the Lorentz resonant medium,
with wo = О and с = Aw = 27Ap, where Ди is the spectral width. A comparison of
the frequency dependence of the real and imaginary parts of the relative permittivity
Е, = €/€ for a Lorentz dielectric resonant medium, based on (5.5-19), or (5.5-20)
and (5.5-21), and for a Drude metal based on (8.2-11), is provided in Fig. 8.2-1.
10 т 10
Dielectric ! \ Metal
(Lorenz model) | \ (Drude model)
K€; \
\ NY 6
0 ‘see 0 И И
“10 04 06 08 1 12 14 aol 04 06 08 1 12 14
о о ay/wg oe “w/w
(a) (b)
Figure 8.2-1 Frequency dependence of the real part (solid curve) and imaginary part (dashed
curve) of the relative effective permittivity €, = €./€. = ©’. + де". (a) Dielectric resonant medium
described by the Lorenz model, (5.5-20) and (5.5-21), with resonance frequency wo, Q = wo/Aw =
10, and Хо = 1. (6) Metal described by the Drude model (8.2-11) with plasma frequency w,, w,T =
10, and € = во. The real part of the permittivity is negative for w < Wp \/1 — (wpT)~? = Wy.

324 CHAPTER 8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
тии |
EXAMPLE 8.2-1. Permittivity and Reflectance of Silver. As an example of the range of
validity of the Drude model, Fig. 8.2-2(a) displays the measured relative effective permittivity е, =
€c/€ for silver (dashed curves) along with the best-fitting functions (solid curves) consistent with the
Drude model [see, e.g., Fig. 8.2-1(b)]. The experimental permittivities and reflectances for various
metals, as functions of wavelength, are available from a number of sources." It is apparent from
Fig. 8.2-2(a) that the Drude-model relative permittivity provided in (8.2-14) fits the experimental data
quite well over the 450-600-nm wavelength range, but is clearly inadequate at shorter wavelengths.
The best-fitting model parameters over the wavelength range displayed (200-600 nm) are Хх» = 4.45,
Wp = 1.47 x 1016 rad/s (Ap = 128 nm), and т = 12 fs (6 = 0.84 x 1014 s~1). These values differ
from those presented in Table 8.2-2 because of the constraints inherent in this analysis.

In Fig. 8.2-2(b), the measured power reflectance for light normally incident on the Ag-air boundary
(dashed curve) is compared with the reflectance calculated on the basis of the Drude model (solid
curve) using the relation R = |(7 — 1) /(й + o)|?, where 7 = \/€c/Mo and No = \/во/ по are
the impedances of Ag and air, respectively [see (6.2-8)]. The fit is quite good over the 400—600-
nm wavelength range, where Ag exhibits near-perfect reflectance (as it does at longer wavelengths).
Other metals exhibit similar behavior. Gold and copper also have free-space plasma wavelengths that
lie well into the ultraviolet (see Table 8.2-2) and those metals do not become good reflectors until the
wavelength exceeds ~ 550 nm (thereby explaining their reddish color). The origin of this behavior is
interband absorption, i.e., absorption by bound electrons, which is not accommodated in the Drude
free-electron model (see Prob. 8.2-3). Aluminum, in contrast, hews quite closely to the predictions
of the Drude model, exhibiting near-unity reflectance over a wavelength range that stretches from
200 nm to beyond 10 рт.

5 | eee Е
2 , ито x
= —6 №

= „2 = \
2 2 \
2-5 0.6 \
Е Е, 1
о r 1
“о 04 1
1
2
—15 27 0.2 1
‘7
\/
20 0 =
600 500 400 300 200 600 500 400 300 200
Wavelength Л» (nm) Wavelength Л, (nm)
(a) (b)
Figure 8.2-2 (а) Real and imaginary parts of the relative effective permittivity ес, = ес. + je’ as
a function of wavelength for Ag. The dashed curves represent experimental values whereas the solid
curves are fits to the Drude model. (b) Power reflectance ® vs. wavelength at the Ag-air boundary.
The dashed curve is the experimental reflectance while the solid curve is the calculated reflectance
based on the Drude model. Note that the wavelength decreases from left to right (corresponding to
increasing frequency); the free-space plasma wavelength Л» lies beyond the right edges of the graphs.
ини |
Simplified Drude model. We now consider the behavior of the Drude model for
angular frequencies sufficiently high such that w >> 1/7 (w >> О, which is equivalent
to neglecting damping (с — 0) in (5.5-16). Under these conditions, (8.2-10) becomes
oO = 00 / ит, which is imaginary, and (8.2-14), with хи = 0, reduces to the effective
permittivity for the simplified Drude model, which is real:

* The experimental data presented in Fig. 8.2-2 were drawn from P. В. Johnson and В. W. Christy, Optical

Constants of the Noble Metals, Physical Review B, vol. 6, pp. 4370-4379, 1972.

8.2 METALOPTICS: PLASMONICS 325
№
Ес ® | 1 — + . (8.2-18)
Ww Effective Permittivity
Simplified Drude Model
It is clear from (8.2-18) that the presence of conductivity in the medium serves to
suppress the permittivity to a value below ео and to impart to it a functional form that
is inversely proportional to the square of the frequency.

The simplified Drude model is useful for describing the optical behavior of metals in
the near-infrared and visible regions of the spectrum [see Fig. 2.0-1]. For wavelengths
shorter than ~ 1 um, which corresponds to an angular frequency w = 27v = 1.9x 101°
rad/s, w >> C for the metals listed in Table 8.2-2.

In summary, for frequencies that are sufficiently high such that w >> 1/7, the

simplified Drude model for a metal is a special case of the Lorentz model for a

dielectric medium in which there is neither a restoring force (к = 0) nor damping

(С = 0). The permittivity (8.2-18) is real and negative for frequencies below the

plasma frequency w,, where the metal behaves as a SNG medium, and real and

positive for frequencies above w,, where the metal behaves as a DPS medium.

Wave propagation in a medium described by the simplified Drude model is charac-
terized by a propagation constant В = nko = \/€c/€o (w/co) and a dispersion relation

wf we
pB=—V1-4, (8.2-19)
Co ® Dispersion Relation
Simplified Drude Model
as illustrated in Fig. 8.2-3. The corresponding relative permittivity €./€,, refractive
index п, and attenuation coefficient a are also displayed in the figure.

It is evident from Fig. 8.2-3 that wave propagation in a metal described by the
simplified Drude model exhibits distinctly different behavior below, at, and above the
plasma frequency и»:

= At frequencies below the plasma frequency (w < wy), the effective permittiv-

ity ес is negative. The metal then behaves as a ЭМО medium with imaginary
wavenumber, k = jw,/|ec|“., which corresponds to attenuation without prop-
agation. This spectral region may therefore be regarded as a forbidden band.
The attenuation coefficient a = 2k, ,/w?/w? — 1 decreases monotonically with in-
creasing frequency and vanishes at the plasma frequency. The free electrons then
undergo longitudinal collective oscillations that take the form of plasmons, the
quanta of the plasma wave (much as photons are the quanta of the electromagnetic
wave). The negative permittivity corresponds to an imaginary impedance, which
indicates that total reflection occurs at the boundary with a DPS medium (see
Sec. 6.2), provided that Л, > Ap. Doped semiconductors, in contrast, are not
reflective in the visible region. This is because the plasma frequency of such
materials lies in the infrared since the free-electron density N is far smaller than
that in metals [see (8.2-16)]. Although the Drude model provides a good starting
point for determining the optical properties of metals and doped semiconductors,
it is by no means the final word, as was illustrated in Example 8.2-1.

326 CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
€c/€ok gnc | pps w .
1 менами ———------= BPP 43
4 Plasmonic ги
0 } Ed band oe
‚р и a г
о << | Forbidden
n a хх : Бапа
a 5
0 0 Bp B
0 | > Figure 8.2-3 Left: Frequency dependence of the
“p и relative effective permittivity €./e€,, the refractive
а index п, and the attenuation coefficient a for a
medium described by the simplified Drude model.
Nee Right: The dispersion relation w = \/w? + 6282.
: Metals support propagating optical waves, known
as bulk plasmon polaritons (BPPs), but only when
the frequency of the wave falls in the plasmonic
0 wp is band (which comprises frequencies greater than the
plasma frequency wy).

и At frequencies above the plasma frequency (w > и»), the effective permittivity
is positive and real so that the medium behaves like a lossless dielectric material,
albeit with unique dispersion characteristics. The propagation constant becomes
В = \/w? — w? /co, while the refractive index п = ,/1 —w?/w? lies below unity and
is very small near the plasma frequency. This spectral band is referred to as the
plasmonic band and waves that travel through the metal in this band are called
bulk plasmon polaritons (BPPs).

В. Metal—Dielectric Boundary: Surface Plasmon Polaritons

Since a metal behaves as a SNG medium at optical frequencies below the plasma
frequency (w < Wp), it can support a surface plasmon polariton (SPP) wave at the
boundary with an ordinary dielectric (DPS) medium. As indicated in Sec. 8.1B, a SPP
is a guided optical surface wave accompanied by a longitudinal electron-density wave
that oscillates at the optical frequency. Because the SPP hugs the metal-—dielectric
boundary over distances far smaller than an optical wavelength, it can be controlled
and manipulated at nanometer spatial scales without sacrificing its optical temporal
frequency. The tight binding of the wave to the boundary carries a concomitant en-
hancement of the local field intensity.

In this section we apply the analysis of SPP waves at a DPS-SNG boundary, de-
veloped in Sec. 8.1B, to a metal—dielectric boundary. Specifically, we combine the
effective permittivity of a metal described by the simplified Drude model, set forth
in (8.2-18), with the general wave-parameter results summarized in (8.1-16) and (8.1-
17). Based on the analysis provided in Sec. 8.1B, a SPP wave can exist at the boundary
provided that the magnitude of the permittivity of the SNG medium |eg| is greater than
that of the DPS medium ет. If the metal is described by the simplified Drude model,
(8.2-18) reveals that its effective permittivity is €2 = €,(1 — w/w”), from which it is
clear that the material behaves as а SNG medium if w < wy. As illustrated in Fig. 8.2-

8.2 METAL OPTICS: PLASMONICS 327
4(a), the condition |е2| > в! is equivalent to the condition w < w,, where
Wp
Ws = 8.2-20
with €,; = €,/€ representing the relative permittivity of the dielectric medium. The
frequency band over which a SPP wave can be supported, w < wg, is smaller than that
over which the simple Drude metal behaves as а SNG medium, 0 < w < wy.

After working through the algebra involved in combining (8.1-16) and (8.2-18), it
turns out that В, np, and сь obey (8.2-21). Equation (8.2-22) is carried over intact from
(8.1-17). Again, Ко = w,/€, 4 = 2 /Ло represents the free-space wavenumber, and
the penetration depth is given by d, = 1/2+.

€ 1—w?/w?
B = Nyko ; Nb = (2. Eb = €1 ss , (8.2-21)
mal —@
"= Velate) Volare)” РР Wave
Metal—Dielectric
As illustrated in Fig. 8.2-4, the behavior of the parameters provided in (8.2-21) differs
for the three salient frequency bands:

= For w < ws, the simple Drude metal behaves as а SNG medium, and SPP waves
may be guided along its boundary with a dielectric medium. The frequency band
w < Ws lies within the forbidden band of the bulk metal, 0 < w < wy, in which
bulk propagating waves are not permitted. The properties of the SPP wave are
dependent on the ratio |€2|/e€,, which is a monotonically decreasing function of
the ratio w/w, and approaches the critical value of unity when w = и. Forging
a comparison with waves in the bulk dielectric medium, the SPP velocity c,/np
is smaller and the plasmon wavelength Ло /пь is shorter. This is also evident from
the dispersion curve displayed in Fig. 8.2-4(c) since В > w/c; for the SPP wave.
In accordance with (8.1-17), the penetration depth in the metal, 45 = 1/24, is
smaller than that in the dielectric, dj = 1/27, and both are smaller than the
wavelength in the bulk dielectric medium. As w/w, increases, the SPP slows
and the associated plasmon wavelength decreases. As explained in Sec. 8.1B,
the SPP also becomes more localized, exhibiting smaller penetration depths in
both the metal and the dielectric. At w/w, = 1, the permittivities of the metal
and dielectric become equal in magnitude and opposite in sign (€; + е2 = 0),
whereupon the velocity of the SPP becomes zero.

и Роги. < w < wp, the simple Drude metal is a SNG medium, but SPP waves
are not permitted since |е2| < ет. Hence, bulk waves propagating in the dielec-
tric medium are totally reflected from the DPS-SNG boundary at all angles of
incidence.

и For w > wp, the simple Drude metal acts as a DPS medium. DPS-DPS bound-
aries cannot support SPP waves. However, much like a dielectric medium, the
bulk metal supports propagating waves, namely bulk plasmon polaritons (BPPs).
At these high frequencies, the reflection and refraction of waves at the metal—
dielectric boundary comply with the conventional laws obeyed by two dielectric
media. Total internal reflection occurs, but only for angles of incidence greater
than the critical angle.

328 CHAPTER 8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
6 w
SPP | SPP | | BPP/ ©
H | © Pad
= = €j р A a ИИ
ма - > ый 9 Os Wp > 0 у. “Dw we a И
Metal © <0 0!
@) (b) °
Figure 8.2-4 Surface plasmon polariton (SPP) wave at a metal-dielectric boundary, as depicted in
Fig. 8.1-3. (a) Frequency dependence of the permittivities of the dielectric and metallic media, €; and
€2, respectively. The condition |е2| > €1, required for the existence of the SPP wave, is satisfied for
Ww < wg. (b) Frequency dependence of the effective permittivity еь of the SPP wave. The wave velocity
is Co/np, where пь = \/вь/во . (с) Dispersion relations for the BPP (bulk plasmon polariton) and
SPP waves. These plots were computed from (8.2-19) and (8.2-21), respectively, using €,1 = 2.25
(the relative permittivity of glass), so that w, = wp//1+ Е = 0.55 Ww». Light lines in free space
and in the bulk dielectric medium are shown as dotted red.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 8.2-2. SPP at Ад-Ай and Ag-SiO, Boundaries. SPP waves are supported at
the boundaries of dielectrics with metals such as silver (Ag) and gold (Au). For an optical wave of
free-space wavelength Л, = 800 nm, the permittivity of Ag is €g = —32.6 ео.’ The plasma frequency
of Ag, и» = 1.37 x 1016 s~!, corresponds to a free-space plasma wavelength Л, = 27c,/wp =
138 nm (see Table 8.2-2). At a Ag-air boundary (€; = во), (8.2-20) provides that the free-space
wavelength corresponding to w, 15 Л, = V2 Ap = 195 nm. SPP waves must therefore have a free-
space wavelength longer than 195 nm to be viable. In accordance with (8.2-21) and (8.2-22), a SPP
wave of frequency corresponding to a free-space wavelength Л, = 800 nm at this boundary has the
following properties:
My = 1.016, A/mm» = 788nm, dy; = 358 ит, 45 = И па.
At a А2-5105 boundary (€; = 3.9, at A. = 800 nm), the free-space plasma wavelengths сог-
responding to w, and и, are Л, = 138 nm and A, = 305 nm, respectively. At this boundary, а
SPP wave of frequency corresponding to a free-space wavelength A, = 800 nm has the following
properties:
пь = 2.104, Ло/пь = 380nm, dy=87nm, 45 =10nm.
Comparing the results for both dielectric media, it is apparent that the higher-index material, $105,
results in a SPP wave with lower velocity, shorter wavelength, and shallower penetration into both
the Ag and the dielectric medium. Moreover, dz < d, for both air and 5105, confirming the deeper
penetration into the dielectric side of the boundary, as depicted in Figs. 8.1-3 and 8.2-4.
ПИ
Generation and Detection of Surface Plasmon Polaritons
Since the propagation constant of a SPP wave traveling along a metal—dielectric bound-
ary is greater than that of an ordinary optical wave of the same frequency propagating
in the dielectric medium [see Fig. 8.2-4(c)], it is difficult to couple the two waves.
One way in which this can be achieved, however, is to couple an evanescent wave,
generated by total reflection at a metal—dielectric boundary, to the SPP wave at the
* The experimental value for the permittivity of Ag at a free-space wavelength of Ло = 800 nm 1$ €g =
(—32.6 + 7 0.5) ео. The calculated value of the effective permittivity at this wavelength, based on (8.2-18) for the
simplified Drude model (no damping), provides ¢4 = —32.8 со, in close agreement with the experimental value.

8.2 METALOPTICS: PLASMONICS 329
opposite metal—dielectric boundary, as portrayed in the prism-coupler configuration
shown in Fig. 8.2-5(a). A similar approach is used to couple light into a waveguide via
a prism, as will become clear in Fig. 9.4-4.

The coupling takes place only when the two waves are phase matched, i.e., when
their propagation constants are precisely equal. From the interior of a prism of re-
fractive index np, this condition is satisfied at an angle of incidence 6, = 0,, where
ПрКо Sin, = В. The parameter В is the propagation constant of the SPP wave, given
in (8.2-21) and (8.2-20), which is dependent on the refractive index ny = /e1/€o
of the dielectric medium adjacent to the remote side of the metallic film [which is
represented in Fig. 8.2-5(a) as air]. It is straightforward to verify that this condition is
met at an angle of incidence 0,. given by

2/12

sing, = ЕО > (8.2-23)
пр VY 1— (14+ nq) w?/w?

When the phase-matching condition is satisfied, optical power is transferred to
launch the SPP wave via a form of frustrated total internal reflection (FTIR), so
that the power of the reflected optical wave at the boundary of the prism diminishes
significantly. The change in reflectance is manifested as a sharp, resonance-like func-
tion of the incidence angle, as portrayed in Fig. 8.2-5(). Since the angle 0, depends

Dielectric п1
SPP_ wa В 1 С —
Metal EW > р _ 3 \ и “
< {7 = fi
» My, Pe | |
0
(а) (dD) 9, бр

Figure 8.2-5 (a) Generation of a SPP wave by use of a prism coupler. An evanescent wave (EW)
generated by total internal reflection of an optical wave at the prism—metal boundary excites a SPP
wave at the opposite metal—dielectric boundary. (b) Dependence of the reflectance of the optical wave
on the angle of incidence 9». When the phase-matching condition is satisfied, at 0, = 6,, a SPP
wave is launched, which results in a decrease of the reflected-wave intensity. A slight change in the
refractive index nj, alters 9, in accordance with (8.2-23), which gives rise to the dashed curve. The
system thus serves as a precise sensor.

on 71, it is sensitive to changes in the physical environment surrounding the metal
film, which determine пл. This measurement technique, known as surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) spectroscopy, has found extensive use for chemical and biological
sensing applications; examples are gas detection and the measurement of molecular
adsorption. Another method of exciting an SPP wave is to scatter light from a periodic
subwavelength structure (grating) deposited on the metallic surface, which contributes
a spatial-frequency component that compensates for the propagation-constant mis-
match.

The detection of an SPP wave may be achieved by converting it into a proportional
optical wave, using a prism coupler or grating operated in a reverse conversion process.

330 — СНАРТЕВ 8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
C. The Metallic Nanosphere: Localized Surface Plasmons
A metallic structure of subwavelength dimensions supports plasmonic oscillations at
its (external or internal) boundary with a dielectric medium. Examples of such struc-
tures are metallic nanospheres, nanodisks, and other nanoparticles. These oscillations
are known as localized surface plasmon polaritons, or simply localized surface
plasmons (LSPs). When the excitation frequency matches the resonance frequency
of the structure, the result is a surface plasmon resonance (SPR). A LSP is to be
distinguished from a long-range SPP, which is a SPP wave that propagates along an
extended metal—dielectric boundary, as described in Sec. 8.2B. Similarly, the surface
plasmon resonance frequency is to be distinguished from the plasma frequency of the
metal, although they are related. Gold and silver nanoparticles have plasmon resonance
frequencies that lie in the visible region of the spectrum, whereas the associated plasma
frequencies of these metals lie well into the ultraviolet. By virtue of the curved sur-
faces of nanoparticles, SPRs may be excited by direct-light illumination. The resultant
intense colors exhibited by such particles, both in transmission and in reflection, are
attributable to resonantly enhanced scattering and absorption.
The Metallic Nanosphere
A metallic nanosphere embedded in a surrounding dielectric medium supports LSP
oscillations. The distribution of the optical field is obtained by solving Maxwell’s
equations in the metal and dielectric, which have negative and positive permittivi-
ties, respectively, and accommodating surface charges and the appropriate boundary
conditions. The field distribution of the lowest-order plasmonic mode is depicted in
Fig. 8.2-6.
Ey LBs
( r—-dA— )
(а) (b)
Figure 8.2-6 (a) Magnitude of the optical field outside a metallic nanosphere supporting the
lowest-order plasmonic mode of this resonator. The internal field is not shown. (5) Field lines of
a plasmonic mode excited by an incident plane wave.

The metallic nanosphere is a resonant scatterer. It is clear from the theory of
Rayleigh scattering provided in Sec. 5.6B that a plane wave with electric field Eo
incident on a small sphere creates a parallel internal field E;, which in turn generates
an oscillating electric dipole that radiates a scattered dipole wave FE; (see Fig. 5.6-
3). In accordance with (5.6-12), the total scattered optical power is Ру = 0.1,
where с’. is the scattering cross section and То is the intensity of the incident wave.
Equations (5.6-16) and (5.6-17), which are applicable when the radius-to-wavelength
ratio a/A < 1, reveal that о. depends on the permittivities с; and € of the nanosphere
and the surrounding medium, respectively, as well as on a/X:

20 Q 8] е-е ‘(2 a)" (8.2-24)
в; = па = = |——_ Tm), .2-
. . ° 3 Je, + 2e А

8.2 METAL OPTICS: PLASMONICS 331

Зе
Е = ——— Eo. 8.2-25
1 Е + ру 0 ( )

For a metal described by the simplified Drude model, the effective permittivity of
the metallic medium is given by es = ©. (1 — 2/7), as provided in (8.2-18); €, is thus
negative or positive, depending on whether w lies below or above the plasma frequency
Wp», respectively. It follows that the denominator (€, + 2е) of (8.2-24) and (8.2-25) can
be either negative or positive, but vanishes when се. = —2e, where о. and Е; increase
without limit. The LSP resonance frequency at which this occurs is established by
setting €,(1 — w/w”) = —2e, which gives rise to

wW

wo = В, (8.2-26)
м 1+ 2е.. LSP
Resonance Frequency
with ©, = ¢€/€,. The surface plasmon resonance frequency wy is to be distinguished
from both the plasma frequency of the metal w, [see (8.2-16)], and the maximum
frequency at which a SPP can exist w, [see (8.2-20)], although all three are closely

related.

At frequencies near wo, the scattering cross section о. and the internal field E; are
substantially enhanced, as depicted in Fig. 8.2-7, which displays о. and EF; as functions
of w. Below resonance (w < Wp), the dipole created by the incident field points in
the same direction as the incident field, while the internal field is in the opposite
direction, i.e., out of phase since Е /Ро is negative. The opposite situation prevails
above resonance (w > wo), as it does for the dielectric nanosphere (Fig. 5.6-3). In the

5 5

dl 2 = == о

0 wo Wp w 0 Wo Wp w
Figure 8.2-7 Resonance characteristics of the scattering cross section с. and the internal field Е;
for a metallic nanosphere described by the simplified Drude model in air (€,, = 1). In accordance
with (8.2-26), the resonance frequency is wo = w,/ УЗ, where W, is the plasma frequency of the
metal. Below resonance, the internal field is opposite in direction to the incident external field (out of
phase), whereas above resonance it is in the same direction (in phase).
vicinity of resonance, both the internal field РЁ, and the scattered field Е. in the near-
field zone can be significantly enhanced with respect to the incident field Ро. This field
enhancement is accompanied by spatial localization of electromechanical energy at a
scale that corresponds to the size of the nanosphere.

The simplified Drude model used to generate the graphs presented in Fig. 8.2-7
assumes that the metal has no absorption; this idealization is the origin of the infinite
cross section and infinite internal field at resonance. Of course, real metals have finite

332 CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
resisitivity and finite absorption, which is mathematically accommodated by introduc-
ing an imaginary component into the permittivity. Denoting the complex permittivity
as с. = © + je’, resonance occurs when the real parts of the denominators in (8.2-24)
and (8.2-25) vanish, namely when © = —2e. Use of the complex permittivity thus
results in residual denominators of je’’, rather than zero, which gives rise to a finite
value of o, at resonance:
87. a4 Ее + Ge?
o.= па? 9,  Qs=5 (275) a (8.2-27)
Aside from being a resonant scatterer, the metallic nanosphere is also a resonant
absorber. As discussed in Sec. 5.6D, the Rayleigh scattering of an incident wave by a
nanosphere of complex permittivity е. in a surrounding medium of real permittivity е
is accompanied by absorption. Both absorption and scattering contribute to the atten-
uation (extinction) of the incident wave. In accordance with (5.6-22), the absorption
cross section of a small, spherical scatterer of radius a, о. = па? Qa, exhibits the
same resonance condition as the scattering cross section a, set forth in (8.2-24), namely
€, = —2e. Substituting «, = ©, + jel! into (5.6-22) leads to an absorption efficiency ©).
given by
WW
OQ, x —4 (27<) Imd S—£ tb _ (2n<) Ре (8.2-28)
А Е + 2е АЛ (Е + 2e)? + в?
At resonance, the denominator on the right becomes simply €2”, which leads to а peak
value of the absorption coefficient given by Q, = —(27a/A)(12€/et!). The larger the
resistivity of the metal, which is represented by с", the broader the resonance profile
and the smaller the peak values of o, and os. EN Pel 7 Ba
Metallic nanospheres whose localized surface plas- ео. р Le gs or
mon (LSP) resonance frequencies lie in the visible and ep $ We 19 Oy 4
ultraviolet bands are used in applications that exploit А ed
their wavelength-selective absorption and scattering (Zien
resonances, along with the attendant field enhancement ae JA To
and localization. Nanospheres embedded in stained Ad PNAS Se
glass, for example, produce brilliant colors as a result БАРА ee
of the extinction of specific wavelengths; an example Na ый ‹ i
is provided by the North Rose Window at Notre Dame POETS я
Cathedral in Paris, pictured at right. As another exam- The North Rose Window at Notre
ple, the dependence of the LSP resonance frequency on Dame Cathedral in’ Райз dates
the relative permittivity с, of the host medium gives ron dae. Metallic voiced elie
rise to a sensor responsive to the dielectric properties shit ed in the stained glass
. . t . xhibit plasmonic resonances with
of the surrounding medium, a host medium with — gramatic optical characteristics,
increased permittivity results in a decreased resonance (Adapted from a photograph by
frequency and an increased resonance wavelength, asis Krzysztof Mizera, August 30, 2008,
understood from (8.2-26). Wikimedia Commons.)
D. Optical Antennas
An antenna is an electrically conductive structure that converts an oscillating elec-
tric current into an electromagnetic field, and vice versa. It is a key component in
transmitters and receivers of electromagnetic radiation. At radiowave and microwave
frequencies, antennas take the form of metallic wires, poles, loops, and microstrips
whose dimensions are of the order of the wavelength [Fig. 8.2-8(a)]. Antennas such as
these are resonant structures. A monopole antenna comprising a metal pole of length
Г mounted on a conducting plate, for example, has a resonance frequency с/4Г,

8.2 METAL OPTICS: PLASMONICS 333
corresponding to a wavelength Л = 4L. Equivalently, a dipole antenna comprising
two poles separated by a small gap, each pole of length Г, exhibits resonance when
Г = ^/4.

An antenna may also take the form of an electrically conductive structure that
intercepts an electromagnetic wave and alters its angular distribution [Fig. 8.2-8(6}].
At microwave frequencies, these include the horn antenna (a metallic horn connected
to the end of a waveguide) and the dish antenna (a paraboloidal metal surface with the
end of a waveguide situated at its focus). These antennas are not necessarily resonant
and their dimensions may be substantially greater than the wavelength of the radiation.

41 <<») SE +x <
Monopole sea Loop Microstrip Horn Dish

(a) (d)

Figure 8.2-8 (a) Radiowave antennas. (b) Microwave antennas.

Rod Split ring Double split ring Nanosphere | G
Tapered fiber Mirror
(a) (b)

Figure 8.2-9 (а) Optical antennas made of metallic structures that exhibit resonance at optical
frequencies. (b) Non-resonant optical antennas.

Resonant optical antennas may be constructed by fabricating metallic structures
similar to those used for radiowave antennas, but with scaled-down dimensions
[Fig. 8.2-9(a)]. However, since the length of an optical quarter-wave dipole antenna
lies in the nanometer region, fabrication can be challenging. At optical frequencies, the
optical field interacts with metallic antennas such as these via SPP waves, which have
propagation wavelengths that are even smaller than the free-space optical wavelength.
These plasmonic antennas operate as scatterers that convert the incoming light into
localized SPP waves that in turn radiate light with a modified spatial distribution.

Optical antennas in the non-resonant category include the metal-coated tapered
optical-fiber tip used in near-field microscopy and the paraboloidal mirror used in
telescopes, as illustrated in Fig. 8.2-9(b). The dimensions of these optical antennas
are typically far greater than the optical wavelength.

An example of an optical antenna that exhibits resonance is provided by an incom-
ing planar optical wave illuminating a metallic nanosphere and exciting a localized
SPP wave, which in turn radiates an optical dipole wave as discussed in Sec. 8.2C.
At the resonance frequency, the field in the vicinity of the nanosphere is enhanced
and localized, and the scattering cross-section increases sharply so that more of the
incoming light is captured and scattered. The nanosphere thus functions as a resonant
optical antenna. Other metallic structures with nanoscale dimensions, such as the split
ring and the double split ring shown in Fig. 8.2-9(a), also exhibit resonances at optical
frequencies; their resonance properties are shape- and material-dependent.

334  CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS

Resonant optical antennas may be used to localize and couple light into small ab-
sorbers, such as single molecules. In the near-field microscopy arrangement depicted
in Fig. 8.2-10(a), for example, a metal rod on a conducting pedestal may be placed at
the end of a tapered optical fiber to create a monopole antenna. A nanosphere at the end
of a pointed glass tip, as illustrated in Fig. 8.2-10(6), carries out a similar function. In
general, a resonant optical antenna placed between an emitter and an absorber can serve
to enhance their interaction by facilitating the processes of radiation and detection.

Tapered fiber Мена
| | rod Figure 8.2-10 Optical antennas used to local-
ize light in near-field microscopy. (a) Monopole
р Glass antenna at the end of a tapered fiber. (6)

Optical up Nanosphere antenna at the end of a glass tip.
monopole
Nanosphere
(a) (b)

The greatest challenge in modeling the interaction of an optical wave with a metallic
structure arises for structures whose dimensions are comparable with the optical wave-
length (~jm). This typically requires a complete analysis incorporating the electro-
magnetic fields and electric-charge distributions. Conventional bulk optical structures,
which have far larger dimensions, are readily analyzed using the usual techniques of
optics. At the opposite extreme, metallic nanostructures are handled quite well with
effective-circuit models, as will become evident in Sec. 8.3A.

8.3 METAMATERIAL OPTICS

Optical metamaterials are synthetic composite materials constructed with carefully
designed spatial patterns and with dimensions that are smaller than the optical wave-
length. They owe their special optical properties to the atomic and molecular structures
of the constituent materials as well as to the geometry and dimensions of the spatial
patterns in relation to the wavelength. They can be engineered to have distinct and
unusual optical properties that are not available in natural materials. Metamaterials
form the basis for various exotic optical devices.

Photonic crystals, considered in Chapter 7, are a special class of optical metama-
terials. These periodic dielectric structures exhibit photonic bandgaps similar to the
electronic bandgaps observed in semiconductor materials. Another special class of
metamaterials, described in this section, makes use of metallic elements of subwave-
length dimensions, such as rods and rings, that are embedded in dielectric media and
organized in periodic or random patterns at a subwavelength spatial scale. The shapes
of these building blocks, and the patterns in which they are arranged, are designed so
that the effective electric and magnetic material parameters, е and д respectively, are
rendered either positive or negative. This in turn allows the synthesis of SNG and DNG
materials, with their attendant special optical properties, as detailed in Sec. 8.1.

When the metallic elements exhibit resonance, the effective behavior of € and jz can
display the familiar frequency dependence of the susceptibility of a resonant medium,
portrayed in Fig. 5.5-6. At frequencies above the resonance frequency, as shown in
Fig. 8.3-1, the real part can be negative so that the medium can be SNG or DNG. AI-
though the imaginary part, corresponding to attenuation, is significant near resonance,
a narrow band with negative real part can persist at sufficiently high frequencies where
the attenuation is minimal.

8.3 METAMATERIAL OPTICS 335

Since д = мо at optical frequencies for naturally occurring nonmagnetic materials,
DNG (negative-index) media cannot be readily created without the use of metamateri-
als. The fabrication of optical DNG metamaterials is undeniably challenging. First, the
metallic elements must be of subwavelength dimensions so that resonance frequencies
lie in the optical band. This requires nanoscale fabrication technology. Second, the
electric and magnetic resonance frequencies must be sufficiently close to each other so
that the bands of negative с and и align, as depicted in Fig. 8.3-1. A great deal of effort
has been directed toward addressing these challenges since the field of metamaterials
has come to the fore. The principles underlying metamaterials also offer promise in the
domains of acoustics, mechanics, and thermodynamics.

| - Ww
у Figure 8.3-1 A medium with resonant рег-
и mittivity and permeability can behave as а
i DNG medium in a frequency band above both
AR resonance frequencies (shaded area).
и } \
We consider three-dimensional optical metamaterials, and metamaterials of reduced
dimensionality, known as metasurfaces, in turn.
A. Metamaterials
The effective electromagnetic parameters € and js for metamaterials comprising three-
dimensional distributions of metallic elements embedded in a dielectric host mate-
rial may be determined by making use of approximate models, complex analytical
techniques, or numerical methods. Approximate models include the effective-medium
approach and the effective-circuit approach. The effective-medium approach based on
the use of the Maxwell-Garnett formula described in Sec. 5.6D is, strictly speaking,
applicable only for nanospheres. However, it is widely used in practice for metallic
particles of other shapes as well.

The effective-circuit approach, on the other hand, is applicable for metallic elements
of various shapes, provided they are sufficiently small. The dielectric/magnetic prop-
erties of a natural material are usually determined by summing the electric/magnetic
dipoles of the constituent atoms induced by the applied electric/magnetic fields. This
enables the polarization and magnetization densities to be determined, and thence the
electric permittivity « and magnetic permeability ри. A similar approach may be adopted
for metamaterials, in which each constituent element, regarded as a Rayleigh scatterer,
is modeled by electric and/or magnetic dipoles. To determine the electric and magnetic
dipole moments, metallic structures of subwavelength dimensions are considered as
electric circuit elements, an approach known as the point-dipole approximation.

Larger elements may be modeled using Mie scattering theory (see Sec. 5.6C), in
which the dipole contributions become the leading terms of multipole series expan-
sions. More complex circuit models can also be used. However, when metallic nanopar-
ticles are juxtaposed in sufficiently close proximity, such that their localized plasmonic
fields overlap, the foregoing approximations fail to account for element-to-element
interactions and inter-element resonances. Such effects may be accommodated via the

336 — CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS

circuit approach by considering mutual couplings between neighboring elements, such
as mutual inductances, and by treating the composite circuits as transmission lines or
circuit networks. When approximations such as these fail, numerical methods offer a
fallback position.

We proceed to examine several approximate models based on both the effective-
medium and effective-circuit approaches. The models we consider describe metamate-
rials exhibiting negative permittivity, negative permeability, negative index, as well as
hyperbolic properties.

Negative-Permiitivity Metamaterial: Metallic Nanospheres in a Dielectric
Medium
As described in Sec. 5.6D and illustrated in Fig. 8.3-2, a dielectric medium of electric
permittivity е that is uniformly filled with small nanospheres of complex permittivity
€s yields an isotropic composite medium of effective permittivity е‹ that obeys the
Maxwell-Garnett mixing rule (5.6-20),
2(1—f)e+ (1-28
ее Е 21 = fe+ (+29 , (8.3-1)
(2+Ве+ (1 — fhe,
where f is the volume fraction of the inclusions (filling ratio).
о бо У
О
о §,,° oo
О о —@. И д Им Wp W
еж es | |
hee D
(a) (ia, (в) (с)

Figure 8.3-2 Negative-permittivity metamaterial. (а) Metallic nanosphere. (6) Metamaterial
comprising uniformly distributed metallic nanospheres embedded in a dielectric medium. (c) The
effective permittivity с. has a pole at the resonance frequency wo and a zero at ил. Since €, is negative
in the band lying between wo < w < w1, this metamaterial is single-negative (SNG) if ju is positive.

For metallic elements described by the simplified Drude model, in accordance with
(8.2-18) we have е; = €o(1—w* /w”), where wy is the plasma frequency, so that (8.3-1)
yields

1—w?/w?

ее = €& 5 8.3-2

where и w

р р
шо = —— Wy = —— (8.3-3)
1-+ 2 2+f 2(1 — f)
в = Е, Его = Е», Е = — Е 8.3-4
т, 1+ r0 ТЕ” ri 1+ 2 a) ( )
and where ¢€, = €/€, is the relative permittivity of the host medium, which is assumed
to be frequency-independent.

As shown in Fig. 8.3-2(c), the effective permittivity ес has a pole at wo and a zero

at и. Since его > €,, the resonance frequency wo falls below that of the isolated

8.3 METAMATERIAL OPTICS 337
nanosphere, which is given Бу (8.2-26). Also, since €,1 < Его, we see that ил > wo,
so that ес 15 negative within the spectral band between wo and ил, which lies below
the plasma frequency w, of the metal. With и positive, this metamaterial is therefore
single-negative (SNG), much like a homogeneous metal below its plasma frequency
[see Fig. 8.2-1(b)].

Negative-Permittivity Metamaterial: Thin Metallic Rods Isotropically
Distributed in a Dielectric Medium
The inductance Г, of a cylindrical metallic rod of length a and radius w (a >> w)
[Fig. 8.3-3(a)] is given by L = (f1.a/27) [In(2a/w) — 3/4]. The effective electric per-
mittivity of a medium comprising parallel rods separated by a distance a, as depicted in
Fig. 8.3-3(b), is determined by observing that an electric field Е along a rod develops
a voltage У = аЕ between its two ends. This in turn generates an electric current
1 = V/jwL in the inductor, which corresponds to a charge 4 = i/jw and an electric
dipole moment p = qa. Since the number of rods per unit volume is N = 1/а3, the
polarization density is given by Р = Np = p/a®. The effective susceptibility of the
medium is thus x. = P/e,F and the effective permittivity is ес = во(1 + Хе).
Combining these equations leads to an expression for the effective permittivity that
is identical in form to that of a simple Drude metal,
и 1 с 1
Ее = во 1-— , Wp) = = = 2 - (8.3-5)
( w Меса Я ,/2n In(2a/w) — 30
with a plasma frequency w, determined by the dimensions of the rod, а and w, via its
inductance L, where we have assumed that the dielectric medium has the permittivity
of free space. With js positive, this metamaterial is thus single-negative (SNG). Though
the rod is assumed to be a perfect conductor in the calculations set forth above, loss is
readily accommodated by adding a resistance В to the impedance jwL of the rod.
и | IN
eq
3 _ ~~ IAIN —= р Wp w
SEs
| IN oer
(a) ow bo ©
Figure 8.3-3  Мезайуе-регтийуйу metamaterial. (а) Thin metallic rods of length a and radius w,
oriented in (6) three orthogonal directions at every point of a cubic lattice of dimension a, create an
isotropic metamaterial. (с) The effective electric permittivity в. has a frequency dependence identical
to that of the simplified Drude model. This metamaterial is thus single-negative (SNG), provided that
р 1$ positive.
Negative-Permeability Metamaterial: Split-Ring Metallic Elements та
Dielectric Medium
A metallic split ring [Fig. 8.3-4(a)], modeled as an inductor L in series with a capacitor
С (the open section of the ring), forms a resonant circuit of resonance frequency wo =

338 — CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
1/V LC. When the size of the split ring is < 100 nm and the gap is < 10 nm, wy lies
in the optical region of the spectrum.

The effective magnetic permeability ие of a metamaterial consisting of a collection
of such split rings, organized uniformly and in three directions at the vertices of a peri-
odic lattice, as shown in Fig. 8.3-4(b), may be established by calculating the magnetic
dipole moment m induced by a magnetic field H applied along an axis normal to the
plane of the ring [Fig. 8.3-4(a)]. The voltage V induced in the loop is equal to the rate
of change of the magnetic flux so that У = —jwjs,AH, where A is the area of the ring.
This voltage generates an electric current i = V/Z, where the circuit impedance is
Z = jwL +1/jwC. This electric current in turn results in a magnetic dipole moment
m = Ai.

A density of N split rings per unit volume gives rise to a magnetization density
М = Мт зо that the effective magnetic permeability де = шо(Н + М)/Н is given
by

1—w?/w? 1 wo
Me = Hog hwy = ee, Е. (83-6)
1 w?/wi УТС АЛ иМАЗИЬ
The inductance of the ring is Г, = моб [In(8b/a) — 7/4], where 6 and a are the ring and
wire radii, respectively (b >> a). As displayed in Fig. 8.3-4(c), ме exhibits a resonance
at wo and a zero at w 1, and is negative in the intervening region. For a positive electric
permittivity е, this structure behaves as a single-negative (SNG) metamaterial. The
frequency dependence of пе revealed in (8.3-6) is the same as that of the effective
permittivity ес for metallic nanospheres set forth in (8.3-2).
Hy ea; Le
(а) (Б) (с)

Figure 8.3-4 Negative-permeability metamaterial. (a) A metallic split ring excited by а magnetic
field exhibits a magnetic dipole moment m. (b) An isotropic metamaterial fabricated by configuring
such split rings in three directions at the vertices of a cubic lattice. (c) The frequency dependence
of the effective magnetic permeability ме exhibits a pole at wo, a zero at ил, and is negative in the
intervening range. When € is positive, this structure serves as а single-negative (SNG) metamaterial.
МедаНуе-таех Metamaterials
The negative electric permittivity of the metallic-rod metamaterial [Fig. 8.3-3(c)] may
be combined with the negative magnetic permeability of the metallic split-ring meta-
material [Fig. 8.3-4(c)] to create a double-negative (DNG) metamaterial that serves as a
negative-index material (NIM). Implementation is achieved by repeating the combined
rod and double split-ring element, displayed in Fig. 8.3-5(a), in two directions, as
illustrated in Fig. 8.3-5(b). This approach requires oblique incidence of the wave, as
indicated, so that surface plasmon resonances (SPR) can be excited with out-of-plane
magnetic fields. This design was first experimentally demonstrated in the microwave

8.3 METAMATERIAL OPTICS 339
Е к № "AA / Figure 8.3-5 Negative-index metamaterial.
Nee Lar A @| (a) Combined rod and double split-ring element.
ем, >; a Pip (b) DNG metamaterial comprising an array of
Y pr dp | the elements shown in (a), oriented along two
| 0 0 y orthogonal directions. For waves traveling along
0 directions in the horizontal plane, the medium
0 6 is double-negative, and the refractive index is
0 () negative, at frequencies above the permittivity
(j 0 and permeability resonances, as schematized in
Fig. 8.3-1.
@ (b)
region, and its dimensions were subsequently scaled down for operation at optical
frequencies.

Alternative designs for optical NIMs that are easier to fabricate have subsequently
been developed. One such design is a “fishnet” metal—dielectric multilayer structure, a
simplified version of which is illustrated in Fig. 8.3-6. In this configuration, the optical
wave is normally incident on the fishnet surface and the electric and magnetic fields
are aligned with the metal strips, as shown. The strips aligned with the electric field
are responsible for the negative permittivity. The strips aligned with the magnetic field
support anti-symmetric resonant modes between pairs of coupled strips, which results
in negative permeability above the resonance frequency. Fishnet nanostructures serve
as NIMs that operate in the visible region.

Dielectric
Metal . oo, .

Figure 8.3-6 Simplified version of а “fish-
net” metal—dielectric nanostructured composite

k metamaterial consisting of a stacked network
of intersecting subwavelength plasmonic wave-
guides. The structure serves as a negative-index
material (NIM) in the visible region of the
spectrum.

*Hyperbolic Metamaterial: Parallel Metallic Rods in a Dielectric Medium
As described in Sec. 8.1C, an anisotropic medium is said to be hyperbolic if the
effective principal values of its permittivity (or permeability) tensor have mixed signs.
We demonstrate that an array of parallel metallic rods embedded in a dielectric medium
of permittivity €, such as those illustrated in Fig. 8.3-7, may exhibit hyperbolic behavior
when the rods have extreme anisotropy by virtue of a large aspect ratio.

For this purpose, we use the effective-medium approach to write expressions for the
principal values of the permittivity tensor along the x, y, z directions (denoted 1, 2, 3,
respectively). An analysis similar to that carried out for the dielectric sphere, the result
of which is provided in (5.6-17), reveals that the ratio of internal and external fields
for a dielectric cylinder takes the form Е/Ро = 2е/(е, + с). Using the Maxwell—
Garnett mixing rule then yields effective permittivities for fields in the plane of the
cross section, and along the axial direction (where Е; / Ру = 1), that are given by:

2fe, + (1 —f)(e, + €)
6е1 = ве = € qtetile—a)” вез = (1—f)e+ fe. (8.3-7)

340 — СНАРТЕВ 8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
Making use of the simplified Drude model (8.2-18) for €,, combining the results for
metallic nanospheres (8.3-2)—(8.3-4) and metallic rods (8.3-5), and using (8.2-20), we
obtain the following expressions for the permittivity principal values:
1 — w/w? из
бет = ве? = 64-3 ото, €e3 = €y | 1 — 2] (8.3-8)
1 — 62/5 Ww
where
Wp Wp Wp
wy = —2— wy, = —“#— из = (8.3-9)
VI + 60° VI ten) VI + & 3°
1+f 1-Е 1-Е
вто = ТЕ er, 61 = ТЕ €r, €r3 = ПР. Er, (8.3-10)
1+f
= Toe Ен = € [f+ (1 —fhe,], (8.3-11)
with в, = €/€.

The effective ordinary permittivity €.; = €¢2 exhibits a pole at the resonance fre-
quency wp and a zero at ил, while the effective extraordinary permittivity €.3 varies
from negative values at low frequencies to positive values at high frequencies, passing
through zero at w3, much like a pure metal. As illustrated in Fig. 8.3-7, an extensive
frequency band exists for which Еес1 = €e2 and есз have opposite signs, so that the
anisotropic medium is hyperbolic. Within this band, the material behaves like a dielec-
tric in one direction and a metal in the orthogonal direction.

< С — 7 О - с
У
yy | | 9 3) | ] 5, 9
| К J 7 оо All 5.9 fw мл 8
| Ni о 5, | 5) ий | | GQ 22°
| Ne | | | | | | | a €el
7
Figure 8.3-7 Hyperbolic metamaterial. Frequency dependence of the principal components of the
effective electric permittivity tensor for a metamaterial comprising parallel metallic rods described
by the simplified Drude model embedded in a host medium of permittivity «. The ordinary effective
permittivities ес1 = €e2 have resonance frequencies wo and exhibit positive values below resonance.
The extraordinary effective permittivity есз is negative in the frequency range и < из. The spectral
band over which the effective medium is hyperbolic is delineated by the shaded region, where €,; =
€e2 and есз have opposite signs.
B. Metasurfaces
Metasurfaces are metamaterials whose dimensionality is reduced from three to two.
Examples are ultrathin arrays of subwavelength-scale metallic elements, deposited
in periodic, aperiodic, or random patterns, on the surface of a dielectric substrate.
Complementary metasurfaces comprise arrays of subwavelength-scale dielectric el-
ements, such as holes and their separations, arrayed on an ultrathin metallic surface.
The shapes of the individual elements, and the geometry of their layout on the surface,
endow metasurfaces with distinctive optical properties that are a consequence of the
coupling of light and SPP waves generated at the metal—dielectric boundary.

8.3 METAMATERIAL OPTICS 341
Metasurface as a Phase Modulator
As explained in Sec. 2.4, a wave traveling in the z direction, on transmission through
a dielectric plate of fixed thickness d and graded refractive index n(x, y) in the т-у
plane, undergoes a spatially varying phase shift p(x, у) = n(x, y)kod, which modifies
its wavefront [see (2.4-14)]. Achieving a phase shift of 27 requires a local thickness
equal to the wavelength of light in the medium. A planar metasurface has the merit that
it can introduce a phase shift of similar magnitude with far less thickness. The metallic
elements of the metasurface function much like optical antennas that modify the optical
wavefront. A resonant antenna acts as a scatterer that introduces a frequency-dependent
phase shift that ranges from —7/2 to 1/2 for frequencies below to above resonance,
respectively.

A spatially varying phase shift ф(х, у) may be implemented by making use of a
metasurface comprising elements of spatially graded sizes and geometries that corre-
spond to spatially varying resonance frequencies. An incoming wave of fixed frequency
is then subjected to a spatially varying phase shift so that the metasurface acts as a
phase modulator. An example is provided in Fig. 8.3-8(a). Since the metasurface is
ultra thin, it may be modeled mathematically as an optical component that introduces a
spatially varying phase discontinuity (i.e., a phase shift that takes place over a distance
d — 0).

x х |

о Ne We |

Dat Dt f ИК

TITIAN 9 1 ! |

ААА 9: «| г > te

Perr к; д k> ef

РРРРРРГГ k 1 . #

И < п и

эмм ллал У р
(а) (b) y (c) |
Figure 8.3-8 (а) А metasurface using an array of metallic elements whose shapes and resonance
frequencies vary in the x direction. The shapes of the elements are engineered such that the phase
shift they introduce is a linear function y = 4х for one of the polarization components. (b) Negative
reflection and negative refraction at a boundary between two media of refractive indices n; and ng
by virtue of the presence of the metasurface portrayed in (a) between the two media. (с) Phase-
matching condition for the incident and refracted waves, and for the incident and reflected waves, at
the metasurface boundary.

The phase modulation introduced by such a metasurface may modify an incoming
optical wave in any of the many ways described in Sec. 2.4. A salutary feature of this
approach is that the wave undergoes minimal spatial spread (diffraction) as it crosses
the infinitesimally thin metasurface. Consider, for example, a phase ф(х, у) that varies
linearly along the metasurface at a rate 4, so that y = qx. The complex amplitude of
the incoming wave is then modulated by the factor exp(—jqa), which is a periodic
function of the spatial frequency и, = q/27, as explained in Sec. 4.1А. An incoming
plane wave of wavevector k, will then generate refracted and reflected plane waves
with wavevectors Ко and ks, respectively.

To ensure phase matching at both sides of the surface, as depicted in Fig. 8.3-8(c),
the component of the vector kz parallel to the surface must match that of k; + а, where
q is a vector of magnitude 4 pointing in the x direction. Likewise, for the reflected

342 CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
wave, the component of the vector kg along the surface must match that of k; + а.
Hence, if the metasurface lies at the boundary between two ordinary media of refractive
indices пл and ng, its presence causes the conventional Snell’s law of refraction and
reflection to assume the following modified form:
nok, sin 05 = плКо sind; + 4, (8.3-12)
Metasurface Refraction
niko sin 03 = ny Ко sin 9, + 4, (8.3-13)
Metasurface Reflection
where 91, 92, and 03 are the angles of incidence, refraction, and reflection, respectively.

With appropriate choice of the magnitude and sign of 4, the presence of the meta-
surface can result in negative reflection and negative refraction at the boundary, as
illustrated in Fig. 8.3-8(b). Equations (8.3-12) and (8.3-13) properly reduce to Snell’s
law when 4 = 0.

For а phase discontinuity y(x) that varies slowly with the position x, the deriva-
tive 4 = dp/dx may be regarded as the local spatial frequency at т. This quantity
determines the local tilt imparted to an incoming wavefront, and thus the angles of
reflection and refraction as a function of x. This approach can clearly be generalized
to metasurfaces that introduce a two-dimensional phase discontinuity y(x, у). In that
case, the vector q = Vy represents the magnitude and direction of the local spatial
frequency of the phase modulation. The metasurface can therefore be designed to
introduced desired local tilts of the wavefront in both the z—z and y—z planes, much
like an antenna array or an optical phase plate. The metasurface can also be engineered
to introduce position-dependent amplitude modulation, imparted by the shape of the
local elements. The combination of phase and amplitude modulation can serve as a
hologram with complex transmittance that is designed to simulate the wavefront of
light generated by an object.

Extraordinary Optical Transmission Through Subwavelength Holes in a
Metallic Film

A metasurface consisting of a periodic array of subwavelength holes and separations
perforated in a planar metallic film may exhibit extraordinarily high optical-power
transmittance at certain wavelengths and angles of incidence. The power transmittance
J(A, 0), as a function of the wavelength Л and the angle of incidence 0, is found to
exhibit sharp peaks with values that significantly exceed those predicated on the basis
of conventional diffraction theory. Indeed, if J, is the total hole area per unit area of
the film, the peak values of the transmittance (Л, 0) for a plane wave traveling in a
direction orthogonal to the film may exceed J), by orders of magnitude.

This phenomenon is attributable to the generation of SPP waves through the holes
and the attendant radiation of light by the oscillating charges created in the metallic
film. The array of subwavelength holes in the metal film should thus be considered
as an active radiating element, rather than as a passive geometrical aperture through
which the light is transmitted.

Maximum transmission occurs at frequencies for which the incident optical wave
and the excited SPP wave are phase matched. For a periodic array of holes in the form
of a square lattice with period ag, the phase-matching condition is

В=К, Emrg, = My, (8.3-14)
where В = (w/co)\/€b/€o is the propagation constant of the SPP wave [ее (8.2-21)];
К. = (27/,) sin @ is the component of the wavevector of the incident light in the plane

8.4 TRANSFORMATION OPTICS 343
of the array; g, = в, = 27 /ао are the fundamental spatial frequencies of the periodic
array; and m, and т, are integers representing associated spatial harmonics (the
scattering order). The transmittance J(A, 0) as a function of the angle of incidence 9
also exhibits photonic band gaps,’ much like those observed in photonic crystals, which
are three-dimensional periodic dielectric structures of subwavelength dimensions (see
Sec. 7.3).

Similar extraordinary optical transmission is expected for holes in a perfect conduc-
tor, rather than a real metal. The medium is then characterized by an effective dielectric
function that has a plasmon form, with a plasma frequency dictated by the geometry of
the holes.*

*8.4 TRANSFORMATION OPTICS
In other chapters of this book, graded-index optics is considered from an analysis per-
spective, with a mandate to determine how light propagates in a medium endowed with
particular dielectric and magnetic properties. Examples are provided in the context of
ray optics, wave optics, and electromagnetic optics:

= Graded-index (GRIN) materials allow optical rays to follow curved trajectories

governed by the profile of the refractive index n(r) (Sec. 1.3).

и The trajectories of scalar waves in GRIN materials can be described in terms of

the Eikonal equation (Secs. 2.3 and 10.2C).

= For isotropic materials with graded electric permittivity «(r) and magnetic per-

meability (1), Maxwell’s equations give rise to the generalized Helmholtz equa-
tions (5.2-16) and (5.2-17); these equations were solved in Chapter 7 for layered
and periodic structures such as photonic crystals.

= The optics of anisotropic graded media are described by Maxwell’s equations

with position-dependent tensors e(r) and u(r); the solution requires full vector
analysis.

= GRIN optics is useful for fabricating a variety of optical components, including

GRIN lenses (Exercise 1.3-1) and GRIN optical fibers (Sec. 10.1B).

In this section, in contrast, we consider graded-index optics from a synthesis or
design perspective, where the goal is to determine the dielectric and magnetic prop-
erties of a medium that realize a desired pattern of light propagation. The synthesis
problem is more challenging than the analysis problem in two respects: (1) the required
mathematical tools are more advanced; and (2) physical implementation of the graded
medium often requires the use of metamaterials constructed from components that
are available, configured in a particular spatial arrangement, and amenable to being
fabricated with current technology.

A. Transformation Optics

Transformation optics is a mathematical tool that facilitates the design of optical
materials that guide light along desired trajectories. The underlying concept relies on
a geometrical transformation that converts simple trajectories into desired ones. In
order that Maxwell’s equations remain valid, the optical parameters associated with

"TW. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. Е. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and P. A. Wolff, Extraordinary Optical Transmission
Through Sub-Wavelength Hole Arrays, Nature, vol. 391, рр. 667—669, 1998.

ТЕЛ Garcia-Vidal, Г.. Martin-Moreno, and J. В. Pendry, Surfaces with Holes in Them: New Plasmonic
Metamaterials, Journal of Optics A: Pure and Applied Optics, vol. 7, pp. S97-S101, 2005.

344  CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS

the transformed equivalent system must also be modified, and this establishes the
character of the required optical material. As a simple example of such equivalence,
a local compression of the coordinate system by a scaling factor is equivalent to a
local increase of the refractive index by the same factor, so that the optical pathlength
(product of length and refractive index) remains unchanged.

A three-step design procedure provides a guide:

= Begin with a pilot physical system for which the optical trajectories are known,

such as a homogeneous and isotropic material.

= Find a coordinate transformation that converts these trajectories to the desired

ones.

= Determine the transformed physical parameters of the equivalent material. The

new material will implement the desired optical trajectories in the original coor-
dinate system.
Since geometrical transformations generally involve changes of directions and in-
troduce direction-dependent scaling, the transformed parameters are generally both
anisotropic and spatially varying.
Transformation Principle
Let {e,;} and {j1;;} be the elements of the permittivity and permeability tensors of
the original material in the original coordinate system (21, 2, 23). The elements of
the permittivity and permeability tensors of the equivalent material (denoted by the
superscript “е”) in the transformed coordinate system (и1, м2, из) are then related to
the original elements by the matrix equations‘
е° = | ав AJ! ATe A, uo = | а Al ALA. (8.4-1)
Here A is the 3 x 3 Jacobian transformation matrix, whose elements are the partial
derivatives
Ану, bd = 12,3. (8.4-2)
j
The quantity АТ is the transpose of A, and € and и аге 3 x 3 matrices whose elements
are {e;;} and {и}, respectively. Since А is generally dependent on (2), 72,73), the
equivalent material is generally inhomogeneous, even if the original material is homo-
geneous.

In the special case for which the original material is both homogeneous and
isotropic, say free space, then Е and и are diagonal with equal diagonal elements
Ео and по, respectively, whereupon

e,'e° = pope = | det А]! АГА. (8.4-3)
The tensors Е° and u® are then identical except for a scaling factor. Under these
conditions the impedance, which depends on their ratio, remains unchanged for all
polarizations, which in turn implies that the equivalent medium introduces no reflection
at any boundary with free space.

We provide a number of examples to illustrate the transformation principle:

1 See, e.g., J. В. Pendry, У. Luo, and В. Zhao, Transforming the Optical Landscape, Science, vol. 348, рр. 521-
524, 2015.

8.4 TRANSFORMATION OPTICS 345
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 8.4-1. Refraction Without Reflection. In this example, we design an optical
material implementing ray trajectories that refract without reflection at a planar surface, as shown in
Fig. 8.4-1(a).

We begin with an initial homogeneous medium, say free space, with rays that follow parallel
straight trajectories at an angle 91, as shown in Fig. 8.4-1(5). We now apply a geometrical transfor-
mation that stretches the coordinate system by a scale factor s along the x3 direction in the region
x3 > 0. The desired refraction is achieved by choosing s as the ratio of the initial and desired slopes,
8 = tan 0, / tan 62 [Fig. 8.4-1(с)]. This transformation is implemented by the relations

Uj =21, U=%, U=s 19. (8.4-4)
This type of scaling of the Cartesian coordinate system, in which the directions of the axes do not
change, converts a cube into a cuboid. Based on (8.4-2), the Jacobian matrix A is diagonal with
diagonal elements (1, 1, s~1) and determinant det A = s~', so that (8.4-3) provides

s 0 0
ete = ии = |0 s Of]. (8.4-5)
0 0 3"
Since the matrices e° and и° are diagonal, the anisotropic material has principal axes pointing along
the axes of the coordinate system. The principal values are: €; = s€,, €2 = S€,, ап ез = s~'e,
together with ил = Spo, 2 = Slo, and из = st fo.
x2 x2 x2

EEE EEECE EEE ЕЕ НЕЕЕЕРЕНЕЕЕЕЕЕНЕЙ
EERE Hg НЕЕ РЕЕБЕЕЕЕЕЕЕВЕРЕРИЙЙЙ ЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕРЕЙЙЙ НЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕНЕЙЙЙЙ
ЕЕЕНЕЕЕЙ,  НЕННИ,  РРЕРЕЕИЙ ЕЙ
РАНЕНИЙ Eee = Ree yy ЕН
РРЕНЕНЕНЕЕЕНЕНННЯ REE yy EE НАЕРЕЕНННЕНЕНЕЕНИЙ
peceeresceceececas HEEEEEEEEEE EEE He ЕЕ ИЕИНИИ EEEEEEEE EEE EEE HEY?
Figure 8.4-1 Geometrical transformation implementing refraction without reflection. (a) Desired
optical trajectories. (b) Free space with straight-line optical trajectories. (c) Stretching the coordinate
system by the factor s for x3 > 0 causes the rays to change slope and follow the desired trajectories.
(d) Equivalent anisotropic, homogeneous material that causes the rays to change slope in an identical
way.

The parameters of the equivalent material may also be obtained by matching the phase shift
encountered when a plane wave crosses the stretched free-space segment with that encountered when
the wave is transmitted through an unstretched segment filled with the new material. To determine the
parameters, we consider three waves in turn, each with the electric field along one of the coordinates:
— Wave | is a plane wave traveling along the x3 direction with electric and magnetic fields in the
x, and x2 directions, respectively. The appropriate permittivity and permeability are thus €, and
fg $0 that К = wy /eqfig = W/S8€oS}lo = Ко, corresponding to a refractive index п: = s. The
phase shift accumulated over the distance d is therefore sk,d, as expected, and the impedance is
m= V 2/1 = 7.

— Wave 2 is also taken to travel along the x3 direction but the electric and magnetic fields are now
in the x2 and —2, directions, respectively. This wave also travels with a refractive index no = s and
has an impedance 77> = т.

— Wave 3 travels along the 12 direction with electric and magnetic fields in the 73 and x, directions,
respectively. The appropriate permittivity and permeability are ез and р so that К = w,/e3f =
w/s—l€58flo = Ко corresponding to a refractive index n3 = 1. The phase shift is k,d, as expected,
since there is no stretching in the x2 direction. The impedance is 73 = ./p1/€3 = 8.

346 CHAPTER 8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS

Using these results, we conclude that the final design is a piecewise homogeneous medium with
free space in the left half plane and an anisotropic uniaxial material in the right half plane [Fig. 8.4-
1(а)]. The anisotropic material is birefringent with ny = 3, no = 3, andn3 = 1, but it introduces
no reflection at the boundary with free space since the impedances are the same as that of free space:
m = 72 = "Mo.

Two factors distinguish refraction at the boundary of the synthesized anisotropic medium from

conventional refraction at the boundary of a homogeneous and isotropic medium: (1) the refraction is
not accompanied by reflection; and (2) the relationship between the angle of refraction and the angle
of incidence, s tan 95 = tan 91, differs from Snell’s law.
EXAMPLE 8.4-2. Refraction at Normal Incidence. We next consider the design of an
optical material that implements refraction by an angle 9 at a normal planar surface, as depicted in
Fig. 8.4-2(a). This type of refraction cannot occur at the boundary between two isotropic dielec-
tric materials, but can occur at the boundary between an isotropic and an anisotropic material, as
described in Sec. 6.3E.

We begin with a pilot system of free space with ray trajectories along horizontal parallel straight
lines [Fig. 8.4-2(6)], and implement the coordinate transformation

м =21, UWw=%2+8%3, U= 73 (8.4-6)
for тз > 0, with s = tan@. This deflects the trajectories, as desired, by shearing along the 12
direction [Fig. 8.4-1(c)]. The permittivity and permeability tensors of the equivalent anisotropic
material corresponding to this coordinate transformation, as determined by use of (8.4-2) and (8.4-3),
are:
10 0
ee =p, pe = |0 1 s |. (8.4-7)
0 s 1+5?
This represents a homogeneous, but anisotropic, medium. When placed in the хз > 0 region, it
introduces the desired refraction at normal incidence [Fig. 8.4-2(d)].
№2 x2 u2 6 №2
О О О Е Trt tt tt) О О О О О Е О О ГЕРЕРРЕРЕЕРР-ЕРЫ CTT TTT tt rt ttt tt)
See ES) FE ВЕНЕ
HEE EERE eee err HEE
НЕРЕЕЕЕЕРЕРЕНЕРЬ EERE EEE EEE EEE EERE err HEE
EEE SESE EEEEEEEEEEEEEEH EEE
НЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕНЕЕЕ ЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕВЕЕЕНЕЕЕ НЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕ EERE EEE
ЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕН ЕЕЕЕЕЕЕРЕРЕЕЕЕЕН НЕВЕВЕНЕРЕННЕЕЕН EEE EEE EEE EE,

0 (a) Хз 0 (b) Хз 0 (c) ИЗ 0 @) Хз
Figure 8.4-2 Geometrical transformation implementing refraction at normal incidence. (а) De-
sired optical trajectories. (b) Free space with horizontal straight-line optical trajectories. (c) Shearing
the coordinate system along the x2 direction for 73 > O refracts the trajectories as desired.
(d) Equivalent anisotropic material that exhibits identical refraction.

EXAMPLE 8.4-3. Cylindrical Focusing. In this case, parallel straight-line trajectories are to
be refracted at a planar boundary such that they all meet at acommon focal point at a distance f from
the boundary, as shown in Fig. 8.4-3(a).

We begin with the straight trajectories shown in Fig. 8.4-3(b) in a Cartesian coordinate system and
apply the coordinate transformation

U=21, U=(f —23)sin(ze/f), из = f —(f — 23) соз(22/ 1), (8.4-8)
for x3 > 0. The result is a cylindrical coordinate system centered at (м2 = 0,u3 = f), as shown
in Fig. 8.4-3(c). This transformation converts a line x2 = a in the plane x; = 0 in the original
coordinate system into a line и2 = (f — из) tan(a/f) in the new coordinate system. It also converts
aline хз = bin the plane x; = 0 into a circle u3 + (f — из)? = (f — 6)? of radius (f — 6) centered

8.4 TRANSFORMATION OPTICS 347
at the point (uz, из) = (0, f). Based on (8.4-1) and (8.4-2), the transformation yields the diagonal
matrix

ete = и = |0 81 01|, =. (8.4-9)
0 0 3 3-1]
The permittivity and permeability tensors of the equivalent medium therefore have principal axes
along the (x1, 52, хз) axes, with principal values that are dependent on the position хз, i.e., the
equivalent material is graded along the x3 direction with larger anisotropy near the focal line [Fig. 8.4-
3(d)].
x2 A № uz A x2 A

(TT TTT TTT tT ttt ttt) [TTT TTT try ttt tt) ГРЕЕТ ГГЕРЕРЕРРРРРРРРИ

Sct) EERE RRR PTR EEE se
KEE EEE SHH НЕЕЕЕЕЕЕБЕРЕЕЕЕЫ EEC SS НЕЕЕЕЕЕРЕМАЕНЕН
HEC Eee > EEE ГЕЕЕЕЕЕЕРЕВЕ ВЫ ЕЕРЕЕРЕЕЕРЕРЕВЬЫ
НЕЕЕЕРЕ-ЕЕЕНРЙРН ж НЕЕРЕЕЕРЕЕЕНЕН 2x3 РЕБЕР us | CC eer] №
РЕРЕРЕРЕИРЕЕЕН  НЕРЕРЕРЕЕРЕРЕРЕН EERE ЯЗ РЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕРЕРНЕНН
Cocco ee a О О О О eee Cece
НЕЕЕЕЕЕНЕЕСЕЕЕЕН | EEE HEHE coco ЕЕЕЕЕЕЕВЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЫ
SS eee СРЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕТЕЕЕЕ) KEEEE EES OH LTT TTT rrr rrr rrr)

(а) (b) (c) (а)

Figure 8.4-3 Geometrical transformation implementing cylindrical focusing. (a) Desired optical
trajectories. (b) Free space with Cartesian coordinate system and parallel straight-line optical
trajectories. (с) Conversion to a cylindrical coordinate system centered at хз = f for x3 > 0 produces
the desired trajectories. (d) Equivalent anisotropic material with identical trajectories.
ПИ
В. Invisibility Cloaks
An invisibility cloak is a device that guides light around an object such that the object
appears transparent, and therefore invisible. For example, the trajectories shown in
Fig. 8.4-4(a) avoid a sphere of radius a, emerging as if they had followed straight lines
and passed right through it.

Following the prescribed design steps for transformation optics, we begin with
the straight-line trajectories shown in Fig. 8.4-4(b) in a Cartesian-coordinate system
(21, 22,23). We next convert to a coordinate system (uz, и2, из) such that points of
a sphere with radius r = \/x? + 12 + 23 are mapped to points of a sphere of radius
и = \/ui и2 + uz > a, thereby avoiding the sphere of radius a, as desired. This is
accomplished for all points r < b, where b > a, via the linear relation

b—a
u=at и (8.4-10)
Аз r varies from 0 to b, u varies from a to 6 so that points of the sphere 0 < r < bin
the original coordinate system are mapped into points in a spherical shell а < и < b
in the new coordinate system. This mapping may also be written аз и = s(r)r, where
а ба
8(т)=-+—— 8.4-11
(r) = 24> (84-11)
is a position-dependent scaling factor.
When applied isotropically, this scaling produces the coordinate transformation
Uy = 8(7) 21, Ug = 3(г) 12, из = 8(r) 23. (8.4-12)

348 = CHAPTER8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS
As can be shown by simple substitution, points on the straight line 12 = f in the plane
x1 = 0 are mapped into the curved trajectory
us 2 “| ” | (8.4-13)
as из — (b—a)f/b |
in the и2-из plane. The red curved trajectories shown in Fig. 8.4-4 are computed from
(8.4-13) for four values of f. The grid shown in Fig. 8.4-4(c) within the shella < и < 6
is computed by use of (8.4-13) and a similar equation determined by mapping the
straight lines хз = f in the plane x, = 0 into the w2—u3 plane. The parameters of the
22 А № и А 2
ДИ РЕЕЕЕЕНЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕН РА Loar ese
p< pw ERE Hi 4 НЕРРЕЕЕНЕЕЕРАЕЕЕ
О (<b> РЕЕЕЕЕЕРЕРЕЕЕЕЕН Е | НЕБЕЕЕЕВЕЕЕЕЕРЕН
— РЕРЕРЕРЕЕЕЕЕЕЕЕН EEE EERE}
(a) (Б) (с) (4)
Figure 8.4-4 Geometrical transformation implementing cloaking of a sphere. (a) Desired optical
trajectories. (b) Free space with Cartesian coordinate system and parallel straight-line optical
trajectories. (c) Coordinate system transformation mapping points inside the sphere to points within
a spherical shell outside the sphere, thereby producing the desired trajectories. (d) Equivalent
anisotropic material with identical trajectories.
equivalent material to be placed in the a < r < b spherical shell shown in Fig. 8.4-4(d)
may be determined by use of (8.4-1) and (8.4-2) together with (8.4-12). The result is
2 2
Те -lae _ bo 1 |? и Ро AS 2 _ ut
© Ее =U, И ра —U2U, 9% aus, > vU = Dau ae’
ИЗ —U3U2 VU" — 13
(8.4-14)
Clearly, the dielectric and magnetic properties of the material in the spherical shell are
both inhomogeneous and anisotropic. For example, at points on the x; axis (u, 0,0),
we have
p [l-—w/v? 0 0
ве = pw, ‘we = —— 0 10. (8.4-15)
ба 9 о 1
At these points, the principal axes are aligned with the Cartesian coordinates (x1, 22, 73).
The principal value €, varies from 0 to €,(b — a)/b as и varies from a to 6, while the
principal values €2 and ез are fixed at the value €,b/(b — a). Similar results apply for
р.

At optical wavelengths, the implementation of invisibility cloaks via metamaterials
requires the use of advanced nanofabrication technologies such as electron-beam or
focused ion-beam lithography. The constituent dielectric and magnetic elements, which
have various shapes and dimensions, must be intricately designed and precisely laid
out. Since such elements are highly resonant, the electromagnetic properties of the
metamaterial depend strongly on wavelength so that such devices typically operate
only over narrow spectral bandwidths.

READING LIST 349
READING LIST

Single- and Double-Negative Media

S. A. Ramakrishna and T. M. Grzegorczyk, Physics and Applications of Negative Refractive Index
Materials, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2008.

J. B. Pendry and D. R. Smith, Reversing Light with Negative Refraction, Physics Today, vol. 57,
no. 6, pp. 37-43, 2004.

R. A. Depine and A. Lakhtakia, A New Condition to Identify Isotropic Dielectric-Magnetic Materials
Displaying Negative Phase Velocity, Microwave and Optical Technology Letters, vol. 41, pp. 315-
316, 2004.

S. A. Darmanyan, M. Neviére, and A. A. Zakhidov, Surface Modes at the Interface of Conventional
and Left-Handed Media, Optics Communications, vol. 225, рр. 233-240, 2003.

М. $. Weiglhofer and A. Lakhtakia, eds., Introduction to Complex Mediums for Electromagnetics and
Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2003.

M. W. McCall, A. Lakhtakia, and W. S. Weiglhofer, The Negative Index of Refraction Demystified,
European Journal of Physics, vol. 23, рр. 353-359, 2002.

R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith, and S. Schultz, Experimental Verification of a Negative Index of Refrac-
tion, Science, vol. 292, pp. 77-99, 2001.

J. В. Pendry, Negative Refraction Makes a Perfect Lens, Physical Review Letters, vol. 85, pp. 3966—
3969, 2000.

У. В. Veselago, The Electrodynamics of Substances with Simultaneously Negative Values of € and ju,
Soviet Physics-Uspekhi, vol. 10, pp. 509-514, 1968 [Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk, vol. 92, pp. 517-—
526, 1964].

Plasmonics

M. I. Stockman et al., Roadmap on Plasmonics, Journal of Optics, vol. 20, 043001, 2018.

A. Triigler, Optical Properties of Metallic Nanoparticles: Basic Principles and Simulation, Springer-
Verlag, 2016.

I. D. Mayergoyz, Plasmon Resonances in Nanoparticles, World Scientific, 2013.

М. Pelton and G. Bryant, Introduction to Metal-Nanoparticle Plasmonics, Wiley, 2013.

A. V. Zayats and S. A. Maier, eds., Active Plasmonics and Tuneable Plasmonic Metamaterials,
Wiley—Science Wise, 2013.

Z. Han and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Radiation Guiding with Surface Plasmon Polaritons, Reports on
Progress in Physics, vol. 76, 016402, 2013.

S. Enoch and N. Bonod, eds., Plasmonics: From Basics to Advanced Topics, Springer-Verlag, 2012.

S. Adachi, The Handbook on Optical Constants of Metals: In Tables and Figures, World Scientific,
2012.

S. Roh, T. Chung, and B. Lee, Overview of the Characteristics of Micro- and Nano-Structured Surface
Plasmon Resonance Sensors, Sensors, vol. 11, pp. 1565-1588, 2011.

D. Sarid and W. Challener, Modern Introduction to Surface Plasmons, Cambridge, 2010.

P. Berini, Long-Range Surface Plasmon Polaritons, Advances in Optics and Photonics, vol. 1,
pp. 484—588, 2009.

S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2007.

M. L. Brongersma and P. G. Kik, eds., Surface Plasmon Nanophotonics, Springer-Verlag, 2007.

H. A. Atwater, The Promise of Plasmonics, Scientific American, vol. 296, no. 4, pp. 56-63, 2007.

W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux, and T. W. Ebbesen, Surface Plasmon Subwavelength Optics, Nature,
vol. 424, pp. 824—830, 2003.

E. J. Zeman and G. C. Schatz, An Accurate Electromagnetic Theory Study of Surface Enhancement
Factors for Ag, Au, Cu, Li, Na, Al, Ga, In, Zn, and Cd, Journal of Physical Chemistry, vol. 91,
pp. 634-643, 1987.

H. J. Hagemann, W. Gudat, and C. Kunz, Optical Constants from the Far Infrared to the X-Ray
Region: Mg, Al, Cu, Ag, Au, Bi, С, and Al,O3, Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron Report DESY-
SR74-7, May 1974.

P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Optical Constants of the Noble Metals, Physical Review B, vol. 6,
pp. 4370-4379, 1972.

350 CHAPTER 8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS

Near-Field Optics and Nanophotonics

M. Bertolotti, C. Sibilia, and A. M. Guzman, Evanescent Waves in Optics: An Introduction to Plas-
monics, Springer-Verlag, 2017.

М. Rotenberg and L. Kuipers, Mapping Nanoscale Light Fields, Nature Photonics, vol. 8, pp. 919-
926, 2014.

L. Novotny and B. Hecht, Principles of Nano-Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2012.

Z. Zalevsky and I. Abdulhalim, Integrated Nanophotonic Devices, Elsevier, 2nd ed. 2014.

L. Novotny, From Near-Field Optics to Optical Antennas, Physics Today, vol. 64, по. 7, рр. 47-52,
2011.

S. V. Gaponenko, Introduction to Nanophotonics, Cambridge University Press, 2010.

M. Ohtsu, K. Kobayashi, T. Kawazoe, T. Yatsui, and M. Naruse, Principles of Nanophotonics, CRC
Press/Taylor & Francis, 2008.

D. Courjon, Near-Field Microscopy and Near-Field Optics, World Scientific, 2003.

S. Jutamulia, ed., Selected Papers on Near-Field Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 172), 2002.

$. Кама, М. Ohtsu, and М. Irie, eds., Near-Field Optics and Surface Plasmon Polaritons, Springer-
Verlag, 2001.

Metamaterials

I. Liberal, A. M. Mahmoud, Y. Li, B. Edwards, and N. Engheta, Photonic Doping of Epsilon-Near-
Zero Media, Science, vol. 355, рр. 1058—1062, 2017.

I. Liberal and N. Engheta, Zero-Index Platforms: Where Light Defies Geometry, Optics & Photonics
News, vol. 27, no. 7/8, рр. 26-33, 2016.

М. Engheta, 150 Years of Maxwell’s Equations, Science, vol. 349, pp. 136-137, 2015.

N. M. Litchinitser and V. M. Shalaev, Metamaterials: State-of-the Art and Future Directions, in
р. L. Andrews, ed., Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume I,
Nanophotonic Structures and Materials, Wiley—Science Wise, 2015.

A. Poddubny, I. Iorsh, P. Belov, and У. Kivshar, Hyperbolic Metamaterials, Nature Photonics, vol. 7,
pp. 958-967, 2013.

R. Marqués, F. Martin, and M. Sorolla, Metamaterials with Negative Parameters: Theory, Design and
Microwave Applications, Wiley, 2013.

О. Hess, J. В. Pendry, 5. A. Maier, В. Е. Oulton, J. М. Hamm, and К. Г. Tsakmakidis, Active
Nanoplasmonic Metamaterials, Nature Materials, vol. 11, рр. 573-584, 2012.

N. I. Zheludev and Y. S. Kivshar, From Metamaterials to Metadevices, Nature Materials, vol. 11,
рр. 917-924, 2012.

У. Liu and Х. Zhang, Metamaterials: А New Frontier of Science and Technology, Chemical Society
Reviews, vol. 40, рр. 2494—2507, 2011.

М. Wegener and $. Linden, Shaping Optical Space with Metamaterials, Physics Today, vol. 63,
no. 10, pp. 32-36, 2010.

T. J. Cui, D. R. Smith, and R. Liu, eds., Metamaterials: Theory, Design, and Applications, Springer-
Verlag, 2010.

W. Cai and V. Shalaev, Optical Metamaterials: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer-Verlag,
2009.

A. K. Sarychev and V. M. Shalaev, Electrodynamics of Metamaterials, World Scientific, 2007.

N. Engheta, Circuits with Light at Nanoscales: Optical Nanocircuits Inspired by Metamaterials,
Science, vol. 317, pp. 1698—1702, 2007.

N. Engheta and R. W. Ziolkowski, eds., Electromagnetic Metamaterials: Physics and Engineering
Explorations, Wiley-IEEE, 2006.

S. Linden, C. Enkrich, G. Dolling, M. W. Klein, J. Zhou, T. Koschny, C. M. Soukoulis, S. Burger,
Е. Schmidt, and М. Wegener, Photonic Metamaterials: Magnetism at Optical Frequencies, JEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 12, pp. 1097-1105, 2006.

G. V. Eleftheriades and K. G. Balmain, eds., Negative-Refraction Metamaterials: Fundamental Prin-
ciples and Applications, Wiley-IEEE, 2005.

D. R. Smith, J. B. Pendry, and M. C. K. Wiltshire, Metamaterials and Negative Refractive Index,
Science, vol. 305, 788—792, 2004.

PROBLEMS 351

Optical Antennas and Metasurfaces

N. Meinzer, W. L. Barnes, and I. R. Hooper, Plasmonic Meta-Atoms and Metasurfaces, Nature
Photonics, vol. 8, pp. 889-898, 2014.

М. Yu and Е Capasso, Flat Optics with Designer Metasurfaces, Nature Materials, vol. 13, pp. 139-
150, 2014.

М. Agio and A. Alt, eds., Optical Antennas, Cambridge University Press, 2013.

A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva, and V. M. Shalaev, Planar Photonics with Metasurfaces, Science,
vol. 339, 1232009, 2013.

A. A. Maradudin, Structured Surfaces as Optical Metamaterials, Cambridge University Press, 2011.

М. Yu, P. Genevet, М. A. Kats, Е. Aieta, J.-P. Tetienne, Е. Capasso, and Z. Gaburro, Light Propagation
with Phase Discontinuities: Generalized Laws of Reflection and Refraction, Science, vol. 334,
pp. 333-337, 2011.

R. Gordon, A. G. Brolo, D. Sinton, and K. L. Kavanagh, Resonant Optical Transmission Through
Hole-Arrays in Metal Films: Physics and Applications, Laser & Photonics Reviews, vol. 4, pp.
311-335, 2010.

P. Bharadwaj, B. Deutsch, and L. Novotny, Optical Antennas, Advances in Optics and Photonics,
vol. 1, pp. 438-483, 2009.

J. Bravo-Abad, L. Martin-Moreno, and Е. J. Garcia- Vidal, Resonant Transmission of Light Through
Subwavelength Holes in Thick Metal Films, JEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Elec-
tronics, vol. 12, pp. 1221-1227, 2006.

Е. J. Garcia-Vidal, L. Martin-Moreno, and J. В. Pendry, Surfaces with Holes in Them: New Plasmonic
Metamaterials, Journal of Optics А: Pure and Applied Optics, vol. 7, рр. 597-5101, 2005.

T. W. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. Е. Ghaemi, Т. Thio, and P. A. Wolff, Extraordinary Optical Transmis-
sion Through Sub-Wavelength Hole Arrays, Nature, vol. 391, pp. 667-669, 1998.

Transformation Optics

J. В. Pendry, У. Luo, and К. Zhao, Transforming the Optical Landscape, Science, vol. 348, рр. 521-
524, 2015.

D. H. Werner and D.-H. Kwon, Transformation Electromagnetics and Metamaterials: Fundamental
Principles and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2014.

A. B. Shvartsburg and A. A. Maradudin, Waves in Gradient Metamaterials, World Scientific/Imperial
College Press, 2013.

М. McCall, Transformation Optics and Cloaking, Contemporary Physics, vol. 54, pp. 273-286, 2013.

J. B. Pendry, A. Aubry, D. R. Smith, and S. A. Maier, Transformation Optics and Subwavelength
Control of Light, Science, vol. 227, pp. 549-552, 2012.

U. Leonhardt and T. G. Philbin, Transformation Optics and the Geometry of Light, in E. Wolf, ed.,
Progress in Optics, Elsevier, 2009, vol. 53, pp. 69-152.

D. Schurig, J. B. Pendry, and D. R. Smith, Calculation of Material Properties and Ray Tracing in
Transformation Media, Optics Express, vol. 14, рр. 9794—9804, 2006.

J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig, and D. R. Smith, Controlling Electromagnetic Fields, Science, vol. 312,
рр. 1780-1782, 2006.

А. Alt and М. Engheta, Achieving Transparency with Plasmonic and Metamaterial Coatings, Physi-
cal Review E, vol. 72, 016623, 2005.

C. Gomez-Reino, M. V. Perez, and C. Bao, Gradient-Index Optics: Fundamentals and Applications,
Springer-Verlag, 2002, paperback ed. 2010.

PROBLEMS
8.1-1 SPP at Boundary Between DPS Medium and Lossy ЗМС Medium. Consider a DPS-SNG
boundary with из = 2 = ро and в, real and positive, and with е2 = © + jey complex with
> real and negative. Given that |e] < 4, demonstrate that the plasmon wavelength A,/ny
and the propagation length 4ь may be calculated with the help of the following approximate
formulas: / 12
maf, qe 2. , dx ete
€o ет + € QT Ny, вое

352 CHAPTER 8 METAL AND METAMATERIAL OPTICS

8.1-2 NIM Slab as a Near-Field Imaging System. Demonstrate the near-field imaging capability
of a slab of refractive index п = —2 in air (п = 1) by constructing a graph similar to that
displayed in Fig. 8.1-6(b), and by determining the imaging equation. Find the reflection and
transmission coefficients for a wave normally incident on the boundaries of the slab. Sketch
the amplitude of an evanescent wave transmitted through the slab by constructing a profile
similar to that portrayed in Fig. 8.1-6(d).

8.1-3 Subwavelength-Resolution Near-Field Imaging with a Lossy NIM Slab. Consider a slab
of refractive index n = —2 in air (n = 1). An evanescent wave entering the slab from air
is amplified by the slab material, as demonstrated in Prob. 8.1-2. If the material is lossy,
there will also be attenuation. If the attenuation coefficient ~ = 0.1k,, where А, = 2” /Ло
is the wavenumber in free space, determine the spatial angular frequency k, (in units of k,)
at which the amplification will be smaller than the attenuation? What is the corresponding
resolution in units of wavelength? Assume that А, = 0.

*8.1-4 Type-II Hyperbolic Medium. For the hyperbolic medium described in Sec. 8.1C, € and
Е2 are positive, while €3 is negative. This is called a Type-I hyperbolic medium. Find the К
surface for a Туре-П hyperbolic medium, in which в! and €2 are negative, while €3 is positive.
Show that a Type-II hyperbolic medium also supports propagating waves with very short
wavelengths, but can be highly reflective.

8.2-1 Group Velocity in a Metal. For a medium described by the simplified Drude model with
effective permittivity (8.2-18), show that the product of the phase velocity and the group
velocity is c?.

8.2-2 Prism Coupler for Exciting a SPP Wave. A SPP wave is to be generated at the interface
between air and a 60-nm-thick layer of Ag by making use of a SiN prism (refractive index
п = 2.0) that abuts the opposite face of the Ag layer (see Fig. 8.2-5). At a free-space
wavelength A, = 700 nm, the relative permittivity of Ag is —20 + 71.3. Calculate the angle
of incidence of the light inside the prism required to couple to the Ag-air SPP. Assume that
the dispersion relation of the SPP wave at the Ag-air interface is undisturbed by the presence
of the prism.

8.2-3 Silver Nanosphere in Glass. Consider a silver nanosphere of radius a = 10 nm embedded
in glass (п, = 1.45). Calculate and plot the scattering efficiency Qs, the absorption efficiency
О., and the normalized internal field E/E, as functions of the free-space wavelength Ло
over the 350—1000-nm wavelength range. Identify the resonance frequency and determine
the scattering and absorption coefficients, a, and a,, respectively, at resonance. Use the fitted
modified-Drude relative-permittivity function for bulk Ag:

< =14— 2 4

€o + jwl we —w? + jul,
where с = 0.00229w,, w, = 0.575», and С, = 0.124w, . The quantity w, corresponds
to a free-space plasma wavelength Л, = 135.2 nm. This model incorporates an interband
absorption (bound-electron) contribution to the complex permittivity.

8.3-1  Negative-Permittivity Metamaterial: Silver Nanospheres in Water. Use the Maxwell-
Garnett mixing rule (5.6-20) to calculate and plot the real and imaginary parts of the effective
permittivity ес of water with inclusions of silver nanospheres [see Fig. 8.3-2(b)], as a function
of the free-space wavelength \,, over the wavelength range from 250 to 1000 nm. Use the
relative-permittivity function of Ag defined in Prob. 8.2-3 and take the refractive index of
water to be constant at n = 1.33. Assume that the volume fraction f = 3%. Identify
wavelength ranges within which the real part of е, is negative. Investigate the effects of
changing both f and n.

*8.3-2 Layered Metal—Dielectric Hyperbolic Metamaterial. Planar layers of metal are alternately
stacked with layers of dielectric material. The anisotropic medium has an effective dielectric
tensor with components е1 = €2 in the plane of the layers and ез in the orthogonal direction.
Use an effective-medium approximation,

Е = © = €mdm + ada 1/ез _ dm/ém + da/ea
Чт + Ча din + da
where €,, and еа are the permittivities of the metal and dielectric layers, respectively, and
4 and dq are their thicknesses. With the help of the simplified Drude-model expression
for ев, show that this structure can behave as a hyperbolic material. Identify which of the
components, е1 or сз, is negative. Sketch the К surface.

CHAPTER
ee
9.1 PLANAR-MIRROR WAVEGUIDES 355
9.2 PLANAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 363

A. Waveguide Modes
B. Field Distributions
C. Dispersion Relation and Group Velocities
9.3 TWO-DIMENSIONAL WAVEGUIDES 372
9.4 OPTICAL COUPLING IN WAVEGUIDES 376
A. Input Couplers
B. Coupled Waveguides
*С. Waveguide Arrays
9.5 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL WAVEGUIDES 385
9.6 PLASMONIC WAVEGUIDES 386
Pa di a :
Jean-Daniel Colladon John Tyndall
(1802-1893) (1820-1893)
Total internal reflection, the basis of guided-wave optics, was first demonstrated in water jets in the
mid-1800s by the Swiss physicist Jean-Daniel Colladon and by the Irish-born physicist John Tyndall.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
353

CSC
Traditional optical instruments and systems make use of bulk optics, in which light
is transmitted between different locations in the form of beams that are collimated,
relayed, focused, and scanned by mirrors, lenses, and prisms. The beams diffract and
broaden as they propagate although they can be refocused by the use of lenses and
mirrors. However, the bulk optical components that comprise such systems are often
large and unwieldy, and objects in the paths of the beams can obstruct or scatter them.

In many circumstances it is advantageous to transmit optical beams through di-
electric conduits rather than through free space. The technology for achieving this
is known as guided-wave optics. It was initially developed to provide long-distance
light transmission without the necessity of using relay lenses. This technology now has
many important applications. A few examples are: carrying light over long distances
for optical fiber communications, biomedical imaging where light must reach awkward
locations, and connecting components within miniaturized optical and optoelectronic
devices and systems.

The underlying principle of optical confinement is straightforward. A medium of
refractive index n,, embedded in a medium of lower refractive index ng < та, acts
as a light “trap” within which optical rays remain confined by multiple total internal
reflections at the boundaries. Because this effect facilitates the confinement of light
generated inside a medium of high refractive index [see Exercise (1.2-6)], it can be
exploited in making light conduits — guides that transport light from one location to
another. An optical waveguide is a light conduit consisting of a slab, strip, or cylinder
of dielectric material embedded in another dielectric material of lower refractive index
(Fig. 9.0-1). The light is transported through the inner medium without radiating into
the surrounding medium. The most widely used of these waveguides is the optical
fiber, comprising two concentric cylinders of low-loss dielectric material such as glass
(see Chapter 10). Other forms of optical waveguides make use of photonic crystals
(Chapter 7) and metal—dielectric structures (Chapter 8).
М. 9.0-1 Optical waveguides.

Integrated photonics, also known as integrated optics, is the technology of com-
bining, on a single substrate (“chip”), various optical devices and components useful
for generating, focusing, splitting, combining, isolating, polarizing, coupling, switch-
ing, modulating, and detecting light. Optical waveguides provide the links among
these components. Such chips, called photonic integrated circuits (PICs), are op-
tical versions of electronic integrated circuits. An example of a transceiver (transmit-
ter/receiver) chip is schematized in Fig. 9.0-2. Integrated photonics serves to minia-
turize optics in much the same way that silicon integrated circuits have miniaturized
electronics.

This Chapter
The basic theory of optical waveguides is presented in this and the following chapter.
In this chapter, we consider rectangular waveguides, which are used extensively in
integrated photonics. Chapter 10 deals with cylindrical waveguides, i.e., optical fibers.
354

9.1 PLANAR-MIRROR WAVEGUIDES 355
Received light Fiber fan coupler
Transmitte teed es : Figure 9.0-2 Schematic of а pho-
tonic integrated circuit that serves as
Modulator .75 - an elementary optical transceiver (trans-
Data LY substrate mitter/receiver). Received light enters
Laser Lag Wavesuide via a waveguide and is directed to a
ИХ о photodiode where it is detected. Light
LZ 4 Photodiode from a laser diode is guided, modulated,
=A 5 “a and coupled into a fiber for transmission.
ata
If reflectors are placed at the two ends of a short waveguide, the result is a structure
that traps and stores light — an optical resonator. These devices, which are essential to
the operation of lasers, are described in Chapter 11. Various integrated-photonic com-
ponents and devices (such as laser diodes, detectors, modulators, interconnects, and
switches) are considered in the chapters that deal specifically with those components
and devices. Photonic integrated circuits based on silicon photonics are addressed in
Sec. 25.1E. Optical fiber communication systems are discussed in detail in Chapter 25.
9.1 PLANAR-MIRROR WAVEGUIDES

We begin by examining wave propagation in a waveguide comprising two parallel
infinite planar mirrors separated by a distance d (Fig. 9.1-1). The mirrors are assumed
to reflect light without loss. A ray of light, say in the y—z plane, making an angle 9
with the mirrors reflects and bounces between them without loss of energy. The ray is

thus guided along the z direction.

This waveguide appears to provide a perfect conduit for light rays. It is not used
in practical applications, however, principally because of the difficulty and cost of
fabricating low-loss mirrors. Nevertheless, we study this simple example in detail
because it provides a valuable pedagogical introduction to the dielectric waveguide,
which we examine in Sec. 9.2, and to the optical resonator, which is the subject of
Chapter 11.

У a x “

. Z| Figure 9.1-1 Planar-mirror
+ |< So о waveguide.
d и.
i 5
Waveguide Modes
The ray-optics picture of light being guided by multiple reflections cannot explain a
number of important effects that require the use of electromagnetic theory. A simple
approach for carrying out an electromagnetic analysis is to associate with each optical
ray a transverse electromagnetic (TEM) plane wave. The total electromagnetic field is
then the sum of these plane waves.

Consider a monochromatic TEM plane wave of wavelength Л = A,/n, wavenumber
К = nko, and phase velocity с = c,/n, where n is the refractive index of the medium
between the mirrors. The wave is polarized in the x direction and its wavevector lies in

356 — CHAPTER9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS

the y—z plane at an angle 9 with the 2 axis (Fig. 9.1-1). Like the optical ray, the wave
reflects from the upper mirror, travels at an angle —9, reflects from the lower mirror,
and travels once more at an angle 0, and so on. Since the electric-field vector is parallel
to the mirror, each reflection is accompanied by a phase shift 7 for a perfect mirror,
but the amplitude and polarization are not changed. The т phase shift ensures that the
sum of each wave and its own reflection vanishes so that the total field is zero at the
mirrors. At each point within the waveguide we have TEM waves traveling upward at
an angle 9 and others traveling downward at an angle —9; all waves are polarized in
the x direction.

We now impose a self-consistency condition by requiring that as the wave reflects
twice, it reproduces itself [see Fig. 9.1-2(a)], so that we have only two distinct plane
waves. Fields that satisfy this condition are called the modes (or eigenfunctions) of
the waveguide (see Appendix C). Modes are fields that maintain the same transverse
distribution and polarization at all locations along the waveguide axis. We shall see
that self-consistency guarantees this shape invariance. In connection with Fig. 9.1-2,
the phase shift Ay encountered by the original wave in traveling from A to В must be
equal to, or differ by an integer multiple of 27, from that encountered when the wave
reflects, travels from A to C, and reflects once more. Accounting for a phase shift of
п at each reflection, we have Ay = 27 AC /X — 2т — 20 AB/X = 27g, where gq =
0,1,2,..., so that 27(AC — AB)/X = 2^(а- 1). The geometry portrayed in Fig. 9.1-
2(a), together with the identity cos(2x) = 1—2sin? x, provides АС — AB = 2dsin9@,
where d is the distance between the mirrors. Thus, 27 (2d sin @)/ = 2m(q+1) so that

27 .

7 29919 = 2am, т = 1,2,.... (9.1-1)
where m = q+ 1. The self-consistency condition is therefore satisfied only for certain
bounce angles 6 = 6,, satisfying

. А
sin), = т —, т = 1,2,.... (9.1-2)
Each integer т, corresponds to a bounce angle 6,,,, and the corresponding field is called
the mth mode. The т = 1 mode has the smallest angle, 01 = sin~'(\/2d); modes
with larger m are composed of more oblique plane-wave components.
СВ
y eae AA А of А
TTT
d ot HAAN ARR <
| Twice- NAA |
AX D*\ reflected \ААААЛАЛАААЛАААААААЛАААА
С wave
(a) (b)
Figure 9.1-2 (а) Condition of self-consistency: as a wave reflects twice it duplicates itself. (b) At
angles for which self-consistency is satisfied, the two waves interfere and create a pattern that does
not change with z.

9.1 PLANAR-MIRROR WAVEGUIDES 357
When the self-consistency condition is satisfied, the phases of the upward and down-
ward plane waves at points on the z axis differ by half the round-trip phase shift ат,
q=0,1,..., ог (т — Т)л, т = 1,2,..., so that they add for odd т, and subtract for
even т.
Since the у component of the propagation constant is given by К, = nk, sin 0, it is
quantized to the values Аут = nko sin Om = (27/A) sin 9». Using (9.1-2), we obtain
п
Кут = ТР т =1,2,3..., (9.1-3)
Wavevector
Transverse Component
so that the ky, are spaced by л/а. Equation (9.1-3) states that the phase shift en-
countered when a wave travels a distance 2d (one round trip) in the y direction, with
propagation constant Кут, must be a multiple of 27.
Propagation Constants
A guided wave is composed of two distinct plane waves traveling in the y—z plane
at angles +6 with the = axis. Their wavevectors have components (0,k,,k,) and
(0, —k,, kz). Their sum or difference therefore varies with = as exp(—jkzz), so that
the propagation constant of the guided wave is В = К. = kcos 6. Thus, В is quantized
to the values би» = kcos@m, from which 82, = k?(1 — sin? 0т). Using (9.1-2), we
obtain
22
men
Bm =k в (9.1-4)
Propagation Constants
Higher-order (more oblique) modes travel with smaller propagation constants. The
values of 0, Кут, and В», for the different modes are illustrated in Fig. 9.1-3.
sind Ку =nkg sin 9
1 nko M
oe | nk k
A/2d bor | | п/а
я! |
ис 1 Ns
A 2
9162 63 Om Ou m/2 6 0 Вт "Ко 8 =nk,cosd
Figure 9.1-3 The bounce angles 6,,, and the wavevector components of the modes of a planar-
mirror waveguide (indicated by dots). The transverse components ky, = ksin@,, are spaced
uniformly at multiples of л/а, but the bounce angles 9„ and the propagation constants В», are not
equally spaced. Mode m = 1 has the smallest bounce angle and the largest propagation constant.

358  CHAPTER9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS

Field Distributions

The complex amplitude of the total field in the waveguide is the superposition of
the two bouncing TEM plane waves. If Ат exp(—jkymy — j8mz) is the upward
wave, then e/("—D" Ат, exp(+jkymy — J8m2) must be the downward wave [at у =
0, the two waves differ by a phase shift (т — 1)z]. There are therefore symmet-
ric modes, for which the two plane-wave components are added, and anti-symmetric
modes, for which they are subtracted. The total field turns out to be E,(y,z) =
2Am Cos(kymy) €XP(—J8mz) for odd modes and 27А», sin(kymy) exp(—JBmz) for
even modes.

Using (9.1-3) we write the complex amplitude of the electric field in the form

E,(y, 2) = Amtm(y) exp(—j8mz), (9.1-5)
where
2 y
— cos (ma) ‚ m=1,3,5,...
d d
Un(y) = 5 (9.1-6)
— = = 2,4,6,...
3 (=), т ,4,6,...,
with a, = V2dA,, and j7V2dA,,, for odd m and even m, respectively. The functions
Um(y) have been normalized to satisfy
d/2
] и? (у) dy = 1. (9.1-7)
—4/2
Thus, ат is the amplitude of mode т. It can be shown that the functions ит (у) also
satisfy
d/2
] u(y) u(y) ау =0, Пт, (91-8)
—а/2
1.е., they are orthogonal in the [—d/2, 4/2] interval.

The transverse distributions ит(у) are plotted in Fig. 9.1-4. Each mode can be
viewed as a standing wave in the y direction, traveling in the z direction. Modes of
large m vary in the transverse plane at a greater rate k, and travel with a smaller
propagation constant В. The field vanishes at у = +d/2 for all modes, so that the
boundary conditions at the surface of the mirrors are always satisfied.

bat ,
а. - Mi Figure 9.1-4 Field distributions
2 6 urors of the modes of a planar-mirror
0 т“ < f? waveguide.
Pa Г
_а <
2

Since we assumed at the outset that the bouncing TEM plane wave is polarized in
the x direction, the total electric field is also in the x direction and the guided wave
is a transverse-electric (TE) wave. Transverse magnetic (TM) waves are analyzed in a
similar fashion as will be seen subsequently.

9.1 PLANAR-MIRROR WAVEGUIDES 359
ee
EXERCISE 9.1-1
Optical Power. Show that the optical power flow in the z direction associated with the TE mode
Е. (у, 2) = ати (у) exp(—JBm2) is (|dm|?/27) cos Am, where 7 = т/п and No = \/Ио/во is the
impedance of free space.
НИ
Number of Modes
Since sin 0,, = mA/2d, т = 1,2,..., and taking sin 6,,, < 1, the maximum allowed
value of m is the greatest integer smaller than 1/(A/2d),

2d
M=—. (9.1-9)
А Number of Modes
The symbol = denotes that 24/Л is reduced to the nearest integer. As examples, when
2d/X = 0.9, 1, and 1.1, we have М = 0, 0, and 1, respectively. Thus, М is the
number of modes of the waveguide. Light can be transmitted through the waveguide
in one, two, or many modes. The actual number of modes that carry optical power
depends on the source of excitation, but the maximum number 1$ М.

The number of modes increases with increasing ratio of the mirror separation to the
wavelength. Under conditions such that 24/Л < 1, corresponding to d < 4/2, М is
seen to be 0, which indicates that the self-consistency condition cannot be met and the
waveguide cannot support any modes. The wavelength Л. = 2d is called the cutoff
wavelength of the waveguide. It is the longest wavelength that can be guided by the
structure. It corresponds to the cutoff frequency

=, (9.1-10)
2d Cutoff Frequency
or the cutoff angular frequency их = 27v, = mc/d, the lowest frequency of light
that can be guided by the waveguide. If 1 < 2d/A < 2 (ie, 4 < Л < 2аоги, <
и < 2v,), only one mode is allowed. The structure is then said to be a single-mode
waveguide. If d = 5 ит, for example, the waveguide has a cutoff wavelength A. =
10 um; it supports a single mode for 5 ит < Л < 10 пл, and more modes for Л <
5 ит. Equation (9.1-9) can also be written in terms of the frequency и, М = v/v. =
w/We, 30 that the number of modes increases by unity when the angular frequency w is
incremented by их, as illustrated in Fig. 9.1-5(а).
Dispersion Relation
The relation between the propagation constant В and the angular frequency w is an
important characteristic of the waveguide, known as the dispersion relation. For a
homogeneous medium, the dispersion relation is simply w = сб. For mode m of a
planar-mirror waveguide, би, and w are related by (9.1-4) so that
82, = (w/c)? — m?x?/d?. (9.1-11)

360 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
This relation may be written in terms of the cutoff angular frequency w. = 271. =
пс/ 4 as
wW и
Bm = —\/1- т. (9.1-12)
с ® Dispersion Relation
As shown in Fig. 9.1-5(6) for т = 1, 2,..., the propagation constant В for mode m is
zero at angular frequency w = mw, increases monotonically with angular frequency,
and ultimately approaches the linear relation В = w/c for sufficiently large values of
В.
и и Ww
р
a т=5 и т=5
о 4 т” 4
Light line 2
о a Forbidden band |
0 1 23 4 5 6 0 0 с”
Number of modes М Propagation constant В Group velocity v
(a) (b) ©
Figure 9.1-5 (a) Number of modes M as a function of angular frequency w. Modes are not
permitted for angular frequencies below the cutoff, w. = ac/d. М increments by unity as w increases
by we. (b) Dispersion relation. A forbidden band exists for angular frequencies below w,. (с) Group
velocities of the modes as a function of angular frequency.
Group Velocities
In a medium with a given w-G dispersion relation, a pulse of light (wavepacket) that
has an angular frequency centered at w travels with a velocity v = dw/d@, known as
the group velocity (see Sec. 5.7). Taking the derivative of (9.1-12) and assuming that
c is independent of w (i.e., ignoring dispersion in the waveguide material), we obtain
28m АВ» / ам = 2w/c?, so that dw/d Bm = с? Bm/w = ck cos Om /w = ссоз Om, from
which the group velocity of mode т is
we
Um = CCOSOm = €\/1—m?—S . (9.1-13)
м Group Velocity
It follows that more oblique modes travel with smaller group velocities since they are
delayed by the longer paths of the zigzagging process. The dependence of the group
velocity on angular frequency is illustrated in Fig. 9.1-5(c), which shows that for each
mode, the group velocity increases monotonically from 0 to c as the angular frequency
increases above the mode cutoff frequency.
Equation (9.1-13) may also be obtained geometrically by examining the plane wave
as it bounces between the mirrors and determining the distance advanced in the z

9.1 PLANAR-MIRROR WAVEGUIDES 361
direction and the time taken by the zigzagging process. For the trip from the bottom
mirror to the top mirror (Fig. 9.1-6) we have

distance d cot 9
= 0. 9.1-14
° time dcsc6/c eee ( )
ZA Figure 9.1-6 А _ plane wave
_ = Mirrors gouncing at an angle 6 advances in
} г YIN $ the z direction by a distance d cot 0
d 5 > in a time 4 сзс 9 /с. The velocity is
м ecos8
dcoté |
TM Modes
Only TE modes (electric field in the x direction) have been considered to this point.
TM modes (magnetic field in the x direction) can also be supported by the mirror
waveguide. They can be studied by means of a TEM plane wave with the magnetic
field in the x direction, traveling at an angle @ and reflecting from the two mirrors
(Fig. 9.1-7). The electric-field complex amplitude then has components in the y and
z directions. Since the z component is parallel to the mirror, it behaves precisely like
the « component of the TE mode (i.e., it undergoes a phase shift 7 at each reflection
and vanishes at the mirrors). When the self-consistency condition is applied to this
component the result is mathematically identical to that of the TE case. The angles 0,
the transverse wavevector components k,,, and the propagation constants В of the TM
modes associated with this component are identical to those of the TE modes. There
are М = 2d/TM modes (and a total of 2/7 modes) supported by the waveguide.
TE тм
< <
Figure 9.1-7 ТЕ and ТМ polarized guided waves.

The z component of the electric-field complex amplitude of mode m, as previously,
is the sum of an upward plane wave Ат exp(—jkymy) exp(—Jj mz) and a downward
plane wave e/("—D" А, exp(Jkymy) €XP(—J8mz), with equal amplitudes and phase
shift (т, — 1)z, so that

2 y ;
Gm) 7 COs (mn) exp(—j6mz), m=1,3,5,...
E.(y,2) = (9.1-15)
2
An\/ q sin (mri) exp(—jBmz), m= 2,4,6,...,
where а„ = V2dA,, and jV2dA,, for odd and even ть, respectively. Since the
electric-field vector of a TEM plane wave is normal to its direction of propagation,

362 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
it makes an angle 7/2 + 6,, with the z axis for the upward wave, and 7/2 — 6,, for the
downward wave.
The y components of the electric field of these waves are
Am Cot Om eXp(—Jjkymy)exp(—JBm2) and е""А п, cot Om exp(JkymY)eXP(—J Bm 2);
(9.1-16)
so that
2 И] .
Gm / a COt An, COS (тт. exp(—j8mz), т = 1,3,5,...
Е, (у, 2) = 5 (9.1-17)
anya cot ди sin (mn) exp(—j6mz), m= 2,4,6,....
Satisfaction of the boundary conditions is assured because F’,(y, z) vanishes at the
mirrors. The magnetic field component H,,(y, z) may be similarly determined by not-
ing that the ratio of the electric to the magnetic fields of a TEM wave is the impedance
of the medium 77. The resultant fields E,(y, 2), E.(y,z), and H,(y, 2) do, of course,
satisfy Maxwell’s equations.
Multimode Fields
For light to be guided by the mirrors, it is not necessary that it have the distribution
of one of the modes. In fact, a field satisfying the boundary conditions (vanishing at
the mirrors) but otherwise having an arbitrary distribution in the transverse plane can
be guided by the waveguide. The optical power, however, is then divided among the
modes. Since different modes travel with different propagation constants and different
group velocities, the transverse distribution of the field will alter as it travels through
the waveguide. Fig. 9.1-8 illustrates how the transverse distribution of a single mode
is invariant to propagation, whereas the multimode distribution varies with z (the
illustration is for the intensity distribution).
y
(а) ~
y
(в) Е
y
Figure 9.1-8 Variation of the intensity distribution in the transverse direction y at different axial
distances 2. (a) The electric-field complex amplitude in mode 1 is E(y,z) = ui(y) exp(—j 612),
where ui(y) = \/2/4 соз(пу/а). The intensity does not vary with z. (5) The complex amplitude
in mode 2 is E(y,z) = и2(у)ехр(—7822), where и2(у) = /2/dsin(27y/d). The intensity
does not vary with z. (c) The complex amplitude in a mixture of modes 1 and 2, E(y,z) =
и (у) ехр(—7812) + ua(y) exp(—jS2z). Since Ву A В2, the intensity distribution changes with z.

9.2 PLANAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 363

An arbitrary field polarized in the x direction and satisfying the boundary conditions
can be written as a weighted superposition of the TE modes,

M
Ex(y,2) = У ` ати» (у) exP(—I8m2), (9.1-18)
m=0
where аж, the superposition weights, are the amplitudes of the different modes.
ee
EXERCISE 9.1-2
Optical Power in a Multimode Field. Show that the optical power flow in the z direction
associated with the multimode field in (9.1-18) is the sum of the powers (|a,,|?/27) cos 9», carried
by each of the modes.
ee
9.2 PLANAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES
A planar dielectric waveguide is a slab of dielectric material surrounded by media of
lower refractive indices. The light is guided inside the slab by total internal reflection.
In thin-film devices the slab is called the “film” and the upper and lower media are
called the “cover” and the “substrate,” respectively. The inner medium and outer media
may also be called the “core” and the “cladding” of the waveguide, respectively. In this
section we study the propagation of light in a symmetric planar dielectric waveguide
made of a slab of width d and refractive index n, surrounded by a cladding of smaller
refractive index ng, as illustrated in Fig. 9.2-1. All materials are assumed to be lossless.
y Xx,

n Bo Figure 9.2-1 Planar dielectric
ПЕНИИ (lab) waveguide, Reys making an
2 7” angle 0 < 0. = соз_"(п2/пал) are
0 > guided by total internal reflection.
d

2 Ny Guided ray G

Light rays making angles 9 with the z axis, in the y—z plane, undergo multiple
total internal reflections at the slab boundaries, provided that 0 is smaller than the
complement of the critical angle 9, = 7/2 —sin~!(n2/n 1) = cos~!(n2/nz) [see (1.2-
5) and Figs. 6.2-3 and 6.2-5]. They travel in the z direction by bouncing between the
slab surfaces without loss of power. Rays making larger angles refract, losing a portion
of their power at each reflection, and eventually vanish.

To determine the waveguide modes, a formal approach may be pursued by develop-
ing solutions to Maxwell’s equations in the inner and outer media with the appropriate
boundary conditions imposed (see Prob. 9.2-6). We shall instead write the solution in
terms of TEM plane waves bouncing between the surfaces of the slab. By imposing the

364 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS

self-consistency condition, we determine the bounce angles of the waveguide modes
from which the propagation constants, field distributions, and group velocities are
determined. The analysis is analogous to that used in the previous section for the
planar-mirror waveguide.

A. Waveguide Modes

Assume that the field in the slab is in the form of a monochromatic TEM plane wave
of wavelength Л = A,/n, bouncing back and forth at an angle 9 smaller than the
complementary critical angle @.. The wave travels with a phase velocity ст = со/та,
has a wavenumber 71 Ко, and has wavevector components k, = 0, ky = п Ко sin 9, and
К, = nk, cos 0. To determine the modes we impose the self-consistency condition that
a wave reproduces itself after each round trip.

In one round trip, the twice-reflected wave lags behind the original wave by a
distance AC — AB = 2d sin 6, as in Fig. 9.1-2. There is also a phase vy, introduced by
each internal reflection at the dielectric boundary (see Sec. 6.2). For self-consistency,
the phase shift between the two waves must be zero or a multiple of 27,

2п .
FZ 2919 — 26, = 27m, m=0,1,2,... (9.2-1)
or
2kyd — 2p, = т. (9.2-2)
The only difference between this condition and the corresponding condition in the
mirror waveguide, (9.1-1) and (9.1-3), is that the phase shift 7 introduced by the mirror
is replaced here by the phase shift ф, introduced at the dielectric boundary.
10 |
0 ——o о о 9 о d
0 — xq — sin 0¢ sind
Figure 9.2-2 Graphical solution of (9.2-4) to determine the bounce angles 9„ of the modes of
a planar dielectric waveguide. The right-hand side (RHS) and left-hand side (LHS) of (9.2-4) are
plotted versus sin 0. The intersection points, marked by filled circles, determine sin 9». Each branch
of the tan or cot function on the left-hand side corresponds to a mode. In this plot sin 6, = 8(A/2d)
and the number of modes is М = 9. The open circles mark sin 6,,, = m2/2d, which provide the
bounce angles of the modes of a planar-mirror waveguide of the same dimensions.

The reflection phase shift y, is a function of the angle 0. It also depends on the

polarization of the incident wave, TE or TM. In the TE case (the electric field is in the

9.2 PLANAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 365
x direction), substituting 0; = 7/2 — д and 0, = 7/2 — @, in (6.2-11) gives
- 20
Dr sin’ 0,
tan ={/—>, - 1 9.2-3
2 sin? 09 , ( )
so that y, varies from 7 to 0 as 9 varies from 0 to 6. Rewriting (9.2-1) in the form
tan(d sin @/A — тл/2) = tan(y,/2) and using (9.2-3), we obtain
а. п sin? 0
tan Gi sin 6 — m5) = {| —_—— —1. (9.2-4)
А 2 sin’ 9 Self-Consistency Condition
(TE Modes)
This is a transcendental equation in one variable, sin 0. Its solutions yield the bounce
angles 9» of the modes. A graphic solution is instructive. The right- and left-hand
sides of (9.2-4) are plotted in Fig. 9.2-2 as functions of sin 0. Solutions are given by the
intersection points. The right-hand side, tan(y,/2), is a monotonic decreasing function
of sin 9 that reaches 0 when sin 9 = sin 0,. The left-hand side generates two families of
curves, бап[(ла/Л) sin 6] and cot|(zd/A) sin 6], when m is even and odd, respectively.
The intersection points determine the angles 6,, of the modes. The bounce angles of
the modes of a mirror waveguide of mirror separation d may be obtained from this
diagram by using y, = 7 or, equivalently, tan(y,/2) = oo. For comparison, these
angles are marked by open circles.
The angles 9» lie between 0 and @,. They correspond to wavevectors with compo-
nents (0, niko sin От, плКо COS A). The = components are the propagation constants
Bm = ПплКо COS Om. (9.2-5)
Propagation Constants
Since cos бт lies between 1 and cos йе = ng /пл, Bm lies between nok, and niko, as
illustrated in Fig. 9.2-3.
nk,
nok,
n,k,sinOch--------2>> M
NN Figure 9.2-3 The bounce angles 6,,,
and the corresponding components k,
woe r ence nnn nnn n5 m and №, of the wavevector of the wave-
oo guide modes are indicated by dots. The
6, le angles 6,, lie between 0 and @,, and the
aw, 1 propagation constants В„ lie between
__ НЕ 0 nok, and пл Ко. These results should be
ZEN compared with those shown in Fig. 9.1-3
о 0 ГЕН for the planar-mirror waveguide.
nok, nk, k= B

366  CHAPTER9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS

The bounce angles 6,,, and the propagation constants В» of TM modes can be found
by using the same equation (9.2-1), but with the phase shift y, given by (6.2-13).
Similar results are obtained.

Number of Modes
To determine the number of TE modes supported by the dielectric waveguide we
examine the diagram in Fig. 9.2-2. The abscissa is divided into equal intervals of width
A/2d, each of which contains a mode marked by a filled circle. This extends over
angles for which sin@ < эт 0.. The number of TE modes is therefore the smallest
integer greater than sin 6,/(A/2d), so that
_ sind,
M = —_. 9.2-6
A/2d ( )
The symbol = denotes that sin 6./(A/2d) is increased to the nearest integer. For
example, if sin 9. /(^/2а) = 0.9, 1, ог 1.1, then М = 1, 2, and 2, respectively.
Substituting cos 9. = ng/n into (9.2-6), we obtain
2d
М = —NA, (9.2-7)
№ Number of TE Modes
where
МА = 4/n? — n3 (9.2-8)
Numerical Aperture
is the numerical aperture of the waveguide (the NA is the sine of the angle of accep-
tance of rays from air into the slab; see Exercise 1.2-5). If d/A, = 10, ny = 1.47,
and ng = 1.46, for example, then 09. = 6.7°, МА = 0.171, and М = 4 TE modes. A
similar expression can be obtained for the TM modes.

When A/2d > sin 0. or (24/Ль)МА < 1, only one mode is allowed. The waveguide
is then a single-mode waveguide. This occurs when the slab is sufficiently thin or the
wavelength is sufficiently long. Unlike the mirror waveguide, the dielectric waveguide
has no absolute cutoff wavelength (or cutoff frequency). In a dielectric waveguide
there is at least one TE mode, since the fundamental mode m = 0 is always allowed.
Each of the modes m = 1, 2,... has its own cutoff wavelength, however.

Stated in terms of frequency, the condition for single-mode operation is that v < 1™,
or & < We, where the mode cutoff frequency is

1
Ve = We [2m = — fo (9.2-9)
2d Mode Cutoff Frequency
The number of modes is then М = v/v, = w/w,, which is the relation illustrated in
Fig. 9.2-4. М is incremented by unity as w increases Бу ис. Identical expressions for
the number of TM modes are obtained via a similar derivation.

9.2 PLANAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 367
Ww
3We Figure 9.2-4 Number of TE modes
2We as a function of frequency. Compare
w with Fig. 9.1-5(a) for the planar-mirror
с waveguide. There is no forbidden band
0 in the case at hand.
0 1 234 5 6
Number of modes М
EXAMPLE 9.2-1. Number of Modes in an AlGaAs Waveguide. Consider a waveguide
fabricated by sandwiching a layer of Al,,Ga,_,As between two layers of Al,Ga;_,,As. The refractive
index of this ternary semiconductor depends on the relative proportions of Al and Ga. Assume that x
and у are chosen such that ny = 3.50 and п: —п2 = 0.05 at an operating wavelength of A, = 0.9 um.
If the core has width d = 10 ym, in accordance with (9.2-7) and (9.2-8) there will be М = 14
supported TE modes. Only a single mode is allowed when d < 0.76 jum.
B. Field Distributions
We now determine the field distributions of the TE modes.
Internal Field
The field inside the slab is composed of two TEM plane waves traveling at angles 0,,,
and —0,,, with the z axis with wavevector components (0, пл Ко sin 0m, Niko COS On).
They have the same amplitude and phase shift ma (half that of a round trip) at
the center of the slab. The electric-field complex amplitude is therefore E,(y,z) =
AmUm(y) exp(—JGmz), where Вт = пл Ко cos 9 is the propagation constant, a,, is a
constant,
sin 9
cos (27) т = 0,2,4,... 9 9
ит (У) © -5<и<ь5, (9.2-0)
. sin бт 2 2
sin "у ‚ m=1,3,5,...,
and A = Ло/пл. Note that although the field is harmonic, it does not vanish at the
slab boundary. As m increases, sin 6,,, increases, so that higher-order modes vary more
rapidly with у.
External Field
The external field must match the internal field at all boundary points y = +d/2.
It is therefore clear that it must vary with 2 as exp(—jz). Substituting the field
E,(y, 2) = атит (у) exp(—j Gmz) into the Helmholtz equation (V?+n3k?) Е, (у, 2) =
0 leads to
dm 2

368 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
where
Yin = Bin — ПА. (9.2-12)
Since Bm > nek, for guided modes (See Fig. 9.2-3), y7, > 0, so that (9.2-11) is
satisfied by the exponential functions exp(—7ny) and exp(7my). Since the field must
decay away from the slab, we choose exp(—7Ymy) in the upper medium and exp(7ny)
in the lower medium
exp(—Ymy), y > d/2
шо тт / (9.2-13)
exp(Ymy), y< —d/2.
The decay rate 7,,, is the field extinction coefficient. The wave is said to be an evanes-
cent wave. Substituting Ви» = nik, cos@m and созд. = n2/n, into (9.2-12), we
obtain
2
cos* 9
Ym = Пао | т — 1. (9.2-14)
cos* 4. Extinction Coefficient
As the mode number ™ increases, @,, increases, and 7, decreases. Higher-order modes
therefore penetrate deeper into the cover and substrate.
To determine the proportionality constants in (9.2-10) and (9.2-13), we match the
internal and external fields at y = d/2 and use the normalization
CoO
] и? (у) dy =1. (9.2-15)
—со
This gives an expression for u(y) valid for all y. These functions are illustrated in
Fig. 9.2-5. As in the mirror waveguide, all of the и» (у) are orthogonal, 1.е.,
CO
] ит (у) u(y) dy = 0, Г т. (9.2-16)
—©
У
m=0 1 2 3 8
а -
_а м.
2
Figure 9.2-5 Field distributions for ТЕ guided modes in a dielectric waveguide. These results
should be compared with those shown in Fig. 9.1-4 for the planar-mirror waveguide.

9.2 PLANAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 369

An arbitrary TE field in the dielectric waveguide can be written as a superposition
of these modes:

Ex(y,2) = У ати» (у) exp(—I8m2); (9.2-17)
m
where а, is the amplitude of mode т.
a
EXERCISE 9.2-1
Confinement Factor. The power confinement factor is the ratio of power in the slab to the total
power
4/2 2
а
г (9) у (9.2-18)
Jo. из, (у) dy
Derive an expression for Г», as а function of the angle 6,,, and the ratio d/A. Demonstrate that the
lowest-order mode (smallest 6,,,) has the highest power confinement factor.
a

The field distributions of the TM modes may be similarly determined (Fig. 9.2-
6). Since it is parallel to the slab boundary, the z component of the electric field
behaves similarly to the x component of the TE electric field. The analysis may start
by determining Р. (9, 2). Using the properties of the constituent TEM waves, the other
components Е’ (у, =) and H,,(y, =) may readily be determined, as was done for mirror
waveguides. Alternatively, Maxwell’s equations may be used to determine these fields.

TE ™
y y
< <
Figure 9.2-6 TE and TM modes in а planar dielectric waveguide.

The field distribution of the lowest-order TE mode (m = 0) is similar in shape to
that of the Gaussian beam (see Chapter 3). However, unlike the Gaussian beam, guided
light does not spread in the transverse direction as it propagates in the axial direction
(see Fig. 9.2-7). In a waveguide, the tendency of light to diffract is compensated by
the guiding action of the medium.

(a) (b)
Figure 9.2-7 (a) Gaussian beam in a homogeneous medium. (b) Guided mode in a dielectric
waveguide.

370 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
C. Dispersion Relation and Group Velocities
The dispersion relation (их versus В) is obtained by writing the self-consistency equa-
tion (9.2-2) in terms of В and w. Since К = (w/c1)? — 8°, (9.2-2) gives
а?
24 \| 5 — 62 = 2p, + 2am. (9.2-19)
С
Since cos 0 = B/(w/c1) and cos 6. = п2/пл = си /со, (9.2-3) becomes
Pr В? — | ©
tan? Е. 9.2-20
о = w/a B 92-20)
Substituting (9.2-20) into (9.2-19) we obtain
d 2 2_ 27,2
tan?( 2 /“ шт] = 2 #18 (9.2-21)
2 ¢ 2 и? [1 — В Dispersion Relation
(TE Modes)
This relation may be plotted by rewriting it in parametric form,
Jy 2 — m2 2 2_ ,2
ти | +—tan! ое ‚ B=nw/co, (9.2-22)
We \/ пл — п2 п я — п
in terms of the effective refractive index n defined in (9.2-22), where и‹/2”п =
Co/2dNA is the mode-cutoff angular frequency. As shown in the schematic plot in
Fig. 9.2-8(a), the dispersion relations for the different modes lie between the lines
W = с26 andw = с16, the light lines representing propagation in homogeneous
media with the refractive indices of the surrounding medium and the slab, respectively.
As the frequency increases above the mode cutoff frequency, the dispersion relation
moves from the light line of the surrounding medium toward the light line of the slab,
1.е., the effective refractive index п, increases from nz to n,. This effect is indicative
of a stronger confinement of waves of shorter wavelength in the medium of higher
refractive index.

The group velocity is obtained from the dispersion relation by determining the slope
и = dw/d@ for each of the guided modes. The dependence of the group velocity on the
angular frequency is illustrated schematically in Fig. 9.2-8(b). As the angular frequency
increases above the mode cutoff frequency for each mode, the group velocity decreases
from its maximum value со, reaches a minimum value slightly below с1, and then
asymptotically returns back toward с1. The group velocities of the allowed modes thus
range from с2 to a value slightly below сл.

In propagating through a multimode waveguide, optical pulses spread in time since
the modes have different velocities, an effect called modal dispersion. In a single-
mode waveguide, an optical pulse spreads as a result of the dependence of the group
velocity on frequency. This effect is called group velocity dispersion (GVD). As
shown in Sec. 5.7, GVD occurs in homogeneous materials by virtue of the frequency
dependence of the refractive index of the material. Moreover, GVD occurs in wave-
guides even in the absence of material dispersion. It is then a consequence of the
frequency dependence of the propagation coefficients, which are determined by the
dependence of wave confinement on wavelength. As illustrated in Fig. 9.2-8(b), each

9.2 PLANAR DIELECTRIC WAVEGUIDES 371
eZ ae eee
4we | ZA, LO 4we |
Light line 1’ fH m=3
ee OF ET AO
3we LZ 3we AP
LE Light line
4 о
A a
1
И —
7 SS
0 Propagation constant 3 С C2 Group velocity v
(a) (b)
Figure 9.2-8 Schematic representations of (a) the dispersion relation for the different TE modes,
т = 0,1,2,...; and (6) the frequency dependence of the group velocity, which is the derivative of
the dispersion relation, v = dw/d{.
mode has a particular angular frequency at which the group velocity changes slowly
with frequency (the point at which v reaches its minimum value so that its derivative
with respect to w is zero). At this frequency, the GVD coefficient is zero and pulse
spreading is negligible.
An approximate expression for the group velocity may be obtained by taking the
total derivative of (9.2-19) with respect to 6,
2d (2 dw Or Oy, dw
— (> — - 28) = 2—— —. 9.2-23
aa (= dB 3) дв "до ав 92-23)
Substituting 44/48 = v, К, / (м /с1) = зщ 0, and К,/В = tan 0, and introducing the
new parameters
Ov, OY,
Az =—, Ar =-—, 9.2-24
“AaB ды 9.225)
we obtain
dcot@+ Az
=. 9.2-25
° 4 сзс0/с1 + Ат ( )
As we recall from (9.1-14) and Fig. 9.1-6 for the planar-mirror waveguide, d cot 0 is
the distance traveled in the z direction as a ray travels once between the two boundaries.
This takes a time d csc 0 /с1. The ratio d cot 0 / (4 csc 0) /с1 = с1 cos 0 yields the group
velocity for the mirror waveguide. The expression (9.2-25) for the group velocity
in a dielectric waveguide indicates that the ray travels an additional distance Az =
др, /OG, a trip that lasts a time Ат = —Ovy,/Ow. We can think of this as an effective
penetration of the ray into the cladding, or as an effective lateral shift of the ray, as
shown in Fig. 9.2-9. The penetration of a ray undergoing total internal reflection is
known аз the Goos—Hanchen effect (see Prob. 6.2-6). Using (9.2-24) it can be shown
that Az/Ar = w/8 = с1/ cos 8.

372 CHAPTER9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
— А: =
Figure 9.2-9 A ray model that replaces the
reflection phase shift with an additional distance
Az traversed at velocity су / cos 0.
= dcot —
Ш Ш[[[
EXERCISE 9.2-2
The Asymmetric Planar Waveguide. Examine the TE field in an asymmetric planar wave-
guide consisting of a dielectric slab of width d and refractive index n; placed on a substrate of lower
refractive index nz and covered with a medium of refractive index пз < ng < т, as illustrated in
Fig. 9.2-10.
(a) Determine an expression for the maximum inclination angle 6 of plane waves undergoing total
internal reflection, and the corresponding numerical aperture NA of the waveguide.
(b) Write an expression for the self-consistency condition, similar to (9.2-4).
(с) Determine an approximate expression for the number of modes М (valid when М is very large).
р’ waveguide.

т
Ш Ш[[[
9.3 TWO-DIMENSIONAL WAVEGUIDES
The planar-mirror waveguide and the planar dielectric waveguide studied in the pre-
ceding two sections confine light in one transverse direction (the y direction) while
guiding it along the z direction. Two-dimensional waveguides confine light in the
two transverse directions (the x and y directions). The principle of operation and the
underlying modal structure of two-dimensional waveguides is basically the same as
planar waveguides; only the mathematical description is lengthier. This section is a
brief description of the nature of modes in two-dimensional waveguides. Details can
be found in specialized books. Chapter 10 is devoted to an important example of two-

dimensional waveguides, the cylindrical dielectric waveguide used in optical fibers.
Rectangular Mirror Waveguide

The simplest generalization of the planar waveguide is the rectangular waveguide
(Fig. 9.3-1). If the walls of the waveguide are mirrors, then, as in the planar case,
light is guided by multiple reflections at all angles. For simplicity, we assume that the
cross section of the waveguide is a square of width а. If a plane wave of wavevector
(kz, ky, kz) and its multiple reflections are to exist self-consistently inside the wave-

9.3 TWO-DIMENSIONAL WAVEGUIDES 373
guide, it must satisfy the conditions:
2k,d = 27mg, т =1,2,...
° ° ° (9.3-1)
2kyd = 2пту, My = 1,2,...,
which are obvious generalizations of (9.1-3).
ky У
mid} ОА | .
т т on q Figure 9.3-1 Modes of a rect-
еее angular mirror waveguide are char-
О О eee eee ee acterized by a finite number of
TR GG GL discrete values of k,, and А» repre-
0 po sented by dots.

о aa А

The propagation constant В = К. can be determined from k, and К, by using the
relation А? + К? + 6? = n?k2. The three components of the wavevector therefore have
discrete values, yielding a finite number of modes. Each mode is identified by two
indices m, and m, (instead of one index m). All positive integer values of m, and m,
are allowed as long as К? + К < п? 2, as illustrated in Fig. 9.3-1.

The number of modes М can be easily determined by counting the number of dots
within a quarter circle of radius nk, in the К, versus k, diagram (Fig. 9.3-1). If this
number is large, it may be approximated by the ratio of the area 7(nk,)”/4 to the area
of a unit cell (л/а)? :

п (2d

Mr—|(|—}]. 9.3-2

д ( T ) (9.3-2)
Since there are two polarizations per mode, the total number of modes is actually 2M.
Comparing this to the number of modes in a one-dimensional mirror waveguide, М =
24 /Л, we see that increase of the dimensionality yields approximately the square of the
number of modes. The number of modes is a measure of the degrees of freedom. When
we add a second dimension we simply multiply the number of degrees of freedom.

The field distributions associated with these modes are generalizations of those in
the planar case. Patterns such as those in Fig. 9.1-4 are obtained in each of the x and у
directions depending on the mode indices т, and my.

Rectangular Dielectric Waveguide

A dielectric cylinder of refractive index пл with square cross section of width d is
embedded in a medium of slightly lower refractive index nz. The waveguide nodes can
be determined using a similar theory. Components of the wavevector (kz, ky, kz) must
satisfy the condition А? + ks < nik? sin? 0., where 0. = cos~!(ng/n1), so that К,
and К, lie in the area shown in Fig. 9.3-2. The values of k, and К, for the different
modes can be obtained from a self-consistency condition in which the phase shifts at
the dielectric boundary are included, as was done in the planar case.

374 CHAPTER9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
ky y
nk,
позе }— _|
п/ d . °. e! e e
t oe siete id Figure 9.3-2 Geometry of a
be * ei ere je J rectangular dielectric waveguide.
ee The values of К, and К, for the
ee eb ete tee waveguide modes are marked by
a И dots.
0 —| |ea/d mk, k,

Unlike the mirror waveguide, К, and К, of the modes are not uniformly spaced.
However, two consecutive values of К, (or ky) are separated by an average value
of л/а (the same as for the mirror waveguide). The number of modes can therefore
be approximated by counting the number of dots in the inner circle in the ky versus
К. diagram of Fig. 9.3-2, assuming an average spacing of л/а. The result is М =
(1 /4)(niko sin 0.)? /(п/а)?, from which

п (2d\?
М=- (=) (МА)?, (9.3-3)
4 \№ Number of TE Modes
where NA = ni - n3 is the numerical aperture. The approximation is satisfactory
when ЛМ is large. There is also an identical number М of TM modes. The number of
modes is roughly the square of that for the planar dielectric waveguide (9.2-7).
Geometries for Channel Waveguides
As illustrated in Fig. 9.3-3, channel waveguides can take many forms. Representative
examples include immersed-strip (or buried channel), embedded-strip, ridge, rib, and
strip-loaded geometries. Exact analysis for many of these geometries can be rather
complex, but approximations serve well. The reader is referred to specialized texts for
details pertaining to this topic.
EV и и
Immersed strip Embedded strip Ridge Rib Strip loaded
Figure 9.3-3 Various waveguide geometries. The darker the shading, the higher the refractive
index.

Waveguides may also be fabricated in a variety of configurations, as illustrated in
Fig. 9.3-4 for the embedded-strip geometry. S-bends are used to offset the propagation
axis. The Y-branch plays the role of a beamsplitter or beam combiner. A pair of Y-
branches may be used to construct a Mach—Zehnder interferometer. Two waveguides
in close proximity, or intersecting with each other, can exchange power and be used as
directional couplers, as will become apparent in Sec. 9.4B.

9.3 TWO-DIMENSIONAL WAVEGUIDES 375
Straight S-bend Y-branch Mach-Zehnder Directional coupler Intersection
Figure 9.3-4 Different waveguide configurations, in this case for the embedded-strip geometry.

Materials
The earliest optical waveguides were fabricated from electro-optic materials, princi-
pally lithium niobate (LINbO3). As shown in Fig. 9.3-5(a), an embedded-strip wave-
guide using this material may be fabricated by indiffusing titanium (Ti) in a lithium
niobate substrate to increase its refractive index in the region of the strip.

Semiconductors are also commonly used. A GaAs rib waveguide may be fabricated
by using layers of GaAs and AlGaAs, which has lower refractive index [Fig. 9.3-5(b)].
Another semiconductor material of substantial importance in optical waveguides is
InP. Its refractive index may be controlled by making use of n-type and p-type dopants,
or by using the quaternary semiconductor InGaAsP with various mixing ratios. The
ridge waveguide illustrated in Fig. 9.3-5(c) offers strong optical confinement because it
is surrounded on three sides by lower index materials — air on two sides and InGaAsP
of a different composition on the third.

Waveguides may also be fabricated from silicon-on-insulator (SOD, usually silica-
on-silicon (5105/51), by making use of standard silicon and oxide etching tools. Since
the refractive index of Si is = 3.5, and that of silica is < 1.5, this combination
of materials exhibits a large refractive-index difference An. A typical SOI structure
takes the form of a Si rib waveguide atop a layer of silica, which serves as a lower
cladding, supported by a silicon substrate [Fig. 9.3-5(d)]. Silicon processing and fab-
rication has been extraordinarily well developed by the microelectronics industry, and
compatibility with complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) fabrication
technology offers an important advantage. This approach lies in the domain of silicon
photonics (Sec. 25.1E).

Glass waveguides fabricated by ion exchange, as well as polymer waveguides, are
also emerging as viable technologies.

The ability to modulate the refractive index is an important requirement for materi-
als used in integrated-photonic devices such as light modulators and switches, as will
become evident in Chapters 21 and 24.

WY 4 Y
Ve Fao

(а) (в) (с) (4
Figure 9.3-5 (a) Ti:LiNbO3 embedded-strip waveguide. (6) Rib waveguide with GaAs core,
AlGaAs lower cladding, and GaAs substrate. (c) InGaAsP ridge waveguide with air and lower-
index InGaAsP cladding. (d) SOI rib waveguide with Si core, silica lower cladding, and Si substrate
compatible with CMOS electronics technology.

376 CHAPTER9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
9.4 OPTICAL COUPLING IN WAVEGUIDES
A. Input Couplers
Mode Excitation
As indicated in previous sections, light propagates in a waveguide in the form of modes.
The complex amplitude of the optical field is generally a superposition of these modes,
Е(у, 2) = У `ати»(у) exp(—JBm2); (9.4-1)
т
where а», is the amplitude, и (у) is the transverse distribution (assumed to be real),
and £,,, is the propagation constant of mode т.

The amplitudes of the different modes depend on the nature of the light source used
to excite the waveguide. If the source has a distribution that is a perfect match to a spe-
cific mode, only that mode will be excited. In general, a source of arbitrary distribution
s(y) excites different modes at different levels. The fraction of power transferred from
the source to mode m depends on the degree of similarity between s(y) and u(y).
To establish this, we write s(y) as an expansion (a weighted superposition) of the
orthogonal functions um(y),

s(y) = У` атИт (У), (9.4-2)
т
where the coefficient аи, which represents the amplitude of the excited mode J, is
CO
a= [ sy) uly) dy. 04-3)
—со
This expression can be derived by multiplying both sides of (9.4-2) by и! (у), integrat-
ing with respect to у, and using the orthogonality relation |” wi(y) Um(y) dy = 0
for 1 = т along with the normalization condition. The coefficient a; represents the
degree of similarity (or correlation) between the source distribution s(y) and the mode
distribution u;(y).
Input Couplers
Light may be coupled into a waveguide by directly focusing it at one end (Fig. 9.4-1).
To excite a given mode, the transverse distribution of the incident light s(y) should
match that of the mode. The polarization of the incident light must also match that of
the desired mode. Because of the small dimensions of the waveguide slab, focusing
and alignment are usually difficult and coupling using this method is inefficient.
AI р Figure 9.4-1 Coupling an opti-
а И 4 cal beam into an optical waveguide.
50) Un(Y)

In a multimode waveguide, the amount of coupling can be assessed by using a

ray-optics approach (Fig. 9.4-2). The guided rays within the waveguide are confined

9.4 OPTICAL COUPLING INWAVEGUIDES 377
to an angle 0. = cos~!(n2/n1). Because of refraction at the input to the wave-
guide, this corresponds to an external angle 0, satisfying NA = эт 0, = n,sin@. =
niv/1 — (n2/n1)? = \/n? — n3, where МА is the numerical aperture of the wave-
guide (see Exercise 1.2-5). For maximum coupling efficiency the incident light should
be focused within the angle 6,.

0a ee и Figure 9.4-2 Focusing rays into
ee ee nn a a multimode waveguide.

Light may also be coupled from a semiconductor source (a light-emitting diode
or a laser diode) into a waveguide by simply aligning the ends of the source and the
waveguide, leaving a small space that is selected for maximum coupling (Fig. 9.4-3).
In light-emitting diodes, light originates from a semiconductor junction region and is
emitted in all directions. In a laser diode, the emitted light is confined in a waveguide
of its own (light-emitting diodes and laser diodes are described in Chapter 18). Other
methods of coupling light into waveguides include the use of prisms, diffraction grat-
ings, and other waveguides, as discussed below.

„— a from a light-emitting diode or laser
Light emitting | | diode into a waveguide.

region LED or
laser diode
Prism and Grating Side Couplers
Can optical power be coupled into a guided mode of a waveguide by use of a source
wave entering from the side at some angle 6; in the cladding, as shown in Fig. 9.4-4(a)?
The condition for such coupling is that the axial component of the wavevector of the
incident wave, п2Ко cos 6;, equals the propagation constant В» of the guided mode.
Since Ви» > nek, (see Fig. 9.4-4), it is not possible to achieve the required phase-
matching condition В» = n2k, cos 0;. The axial component of the wavevector of the
incident wave is simply too small. However, the problem may be alleviated by use of a
prism or a grating.
Prism
; Incident Incident
Incident wave Np wave
` Grating
0,
TA. No LA | 4% ON Grating
п 0» | ——- Bm
(а) Ny (b) Prism coupler (c) Grating coupler
Figure 9.4-4 Prism and grating side couplers.

378 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS

As illustrated in Fig. 9.4-4(6), a prism of refractive index np > по is placed at a
small distance d, from the waveguide slab. The incident wave is refracted into the
prism where it undergoes total internal reflection at an angle 6,. The incident and
reflected waves form a wave traveling in the z direction with propagation constant
Bp = Np Ко cos Op. The transverse field distribution extends into the space separating
the prism and the slab as an exponentially decaying evanescent wave. If the distance d,,
is sufficiently small, the wave couples to a mode of the slab waveguide with a matching
propagation constant В» = By = пр Косозбь. Since ny» > ne, phase matching is
possible, and if an appropriate interaction distance is selected, frustrated total internal
reflection ensues and significant power can be coupled into the waveguide. The oper-
ation may also be reversed to make an output coupler, extracting light from the slab
waveguide into free space. This is the same approach as that used to excite a surface
plasmon polariton wave at a metal—dielectric boundary, as illustrated in Fig. 8.2-5.

The grating [Fig. 9.4-4(c)] addresses the phase-matching problem by modifying the
wavevector of the incoming wave. A grating with period A modulates the incoming
wave by phase factors 27q/Az, where 4 = +1,+2,.... These are equivalent to
changes of the axial component of the wavevector by factors 27q/A. The phase-
matching condition can now be satisfied if nz Ко cos 0; + 27q/A = Вт, with q = 1,
for example. The grating may even be designed to enhance the g = 1 component.

B. Coupled Waveguides

If two waveguides are sufficiently close such that their fields overlap, light can be
coupled from one into the other. Optical power can then be transferred between the
waveguides, an effect that can be used to make optical couplers and switches. The
basic principle of waveguide coupling is presented here; couplers and switches are
discussed in Chapters 24 and 25.

Consider two parallel planar waveguides made of two slabs of widths d, separation
2a, and refractive indices n; and 72, embedded in a medium of refraction index n that
is slightly smaller than 71 and 72, as illustrated in Fig. 9.4-5. Each of the waveguides
is assumed to be single-mode. The separation between the waveguides is such that the
optical field outside the slab of one waveguide (in the absence of the other) overlaps
slightly with the slab of the other waveguide.

y Figure 9.4-5 Coupling between
yr yrs two parallel planar waveguides.
At z = 0 the light is located

Я | principally in the upper waveguide

Ва (waveguide 1); at z = [0/2 the
+ Е А | | | iil light is divided equally between the
d | | | two waveguides; and at z = Lo the
on | light is located principally in the
1 Z| Z| м (| (| Ч Tt < lower waveguide (waveguide 2).
d | | | The distance Го at which the power
т ВАХА is completely transferred from one
waveguide to the other is called
the coupling length or transfer

О |, ———+ | distance.

The formal approach to studying the propagation of light in this structure is to
write Maxwell’s equations for the different regions and use the boundary conditions
to determine the modes of the overall system. These modes are different from those
of each of the waveguides in isolation. An exact analysis is not easy and is beyond
the scope of this book. For weak coupling, however, a simplified approximate theory,
known as coupled-mode theory, is often satisfactory.

9.4 OPTICAL COUPLING INWAVEGUIDES 379

Coupled-mode theory assumes that the mode of each waveguide is determined
as if the other waveguide were absent. In the presence of both waveguides, the
modes are taken to remain approximately unchanged, say из (у) ехр(—761=) and
u2(y) ехр(—7622). Coupling is assumed to modify only the amplitudes of these
modes without affecting either their transverse spatial distributions or their propagation
constants. The amplitudes of the modes of waveguides 1 and 2 are therefore functions
of z, ai(z), and a2(z). The theory is directed toward determining а1(2) and а2(2)
under appropriate boundary conditions.

Coupling can be regarded as a scattering effect. The field of waveguide 1 is scattered
from waveguide 2, creating a source of light that changes the amplitude of the field in
waveguide 2. The field of waveguide 2 has a similar effect on waveguide 1. An analysis
of this mutual interaction leads to two coupled differential equations that govern the
variation of the amplitudes a;(z) and a2(z).

It can be shown (see the derivation at the end of this section) that the amplitudes
а1(2) and а2(2) are governed by two coupled first-order differential equations

da, . .
tn 1621 exp(j АВ z) ag(z) (9.4-4a)
da . .
Fe = 7 @ехр(-7 ДВ 2) а1(2), (9.4-4b)
2 Coupled-Mode
Equations
where
AB = В! - Pe (9.4-5)
is the phase mismatch per unit length and
(2 a+d
Ca, = 1 (п5 — п?) al ил (У) ч2(у) dy,
° (9.4-6)
2 oy ke |"
C= $ (nin) | usly) alu) ay
В> —а—а
are coupling coefficients. We see from (9.4-4) that the rate of variation of a, is pro-
portional to ag, and vice versa. The coefficient of proportionality is the product of the
coupling coefficient and the phase mismatch factor exp(j ДВ z).

The coupled-mode equations in (9.4-4) may be solved by beginning with har-
monic trial solutions of the form a;(z) = b; exp(jyz) exp(jAG z/2) and ag(z) =
by exp(jyz) exp(—jAG z/2), where b; and bz are constants. These solution satisfy
(9.4-4) provided that the following condition is satisfied:

ABY? =
Since ¥ has two possible values, we modify the trial solutions to be superpositions of
exp(j7z) and exp(—jyz), or of sin(yz) and cos(yz), where ¥ is the positive value of
the square root in (9.4-7). The weights of the superposition are established from the
boundary values a;(0) and a2(0). The final outcome is
а1(2) = A(z)a;(0) + В(=)а2(0) (9.4-8a)

380 — СНАРТЕА9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
where
А A
A(z) = D*(z) = exp(75"*) (cos 92 — ix sin 7) (9.4-9a)
С A
B(z) = —* exp (15) sin yz (9.4-9b)
IY 2
С A
C(z) = —12 exp (-1°5*) sin yz (9.4-9c)
IY 2
are elements of a transmission matrix T that relates the output and input fields.
If we assume that no light enters waveguide 2 so that a2(0) = 0, then the optical
powers P;(z) сх [ал (2)? and P2(z) сх |a2(z)|? are
2 ABY* 2
P1(z) = Р1(0) |cos* yz + 34 ) sin’ ye (9.4-10a)
Y
Po(z) = P,(0) Ва gin? 9.4-10b
2(z) = Р1(0) 2 sin* yz. (9.4-10b)
Thus, power is exchanged periodically between the two waveguides, as illustrated in
Fig. 9.4-6(a). The period is п/у.
РК) P\(0)
Г Po
> Lo kK
P\(0) \ ; их ; их Penn, P\(0) М /\ iV ©
хи №9 \_/ \ / \ / \
Pole) \ \ \ P22)
0 \v7 \/ \
о 5 0 Lo НЕ
(а) (bd)
Figure 9.4-6 Periodic exchange of power between waveguides 1 and 2: (a) Phase-mismatched
case; (b) phase-matched case.

When the waveguides are identical, 1.е., пл = 72, 61 = Bo, and АВ = 0, the two
guided waves are said to be phase matched. In this case, y = ©, Cjz = 62: = ©, and
the transmission matrix takes the simpler form

T= A(z) Bz) _ cos Cz —jsinez (04-11)
C(z) D(z) —jsin@Cz  cos@z
Equations (9.4-10) then simplify to
P,(z) = Ри(0) соз? Cz (9.4-12а)
P(z) = Р1(0) sin? Cz. (9.4-12b)
The exchange of power between the waveguides can then be complete, as illustrated in
Fig. 9.4-6(Ъ).

9.4 OPTICAL COUPLING IN WAVEGUIDES 381
We thus have a device capable of coupling any desired fraction of optical power
from one waveguide into another. At a distance z = Lo = 7/20, called the coupling
length or the transfer distance, the power is transferred completely from waveguide 1
into waveguide 2 [Fig. 9.4-7(a)]. At a distance Гр /2, half the power is transferred, so
that the device acts as a 3-dB coupler, i.e., a 50/50 beamsplitter [Fig. 9.4-7(6)].
P ~~ Lo P a Lo /2
a aN
P/2
Р Р/2
(а) (b)
Figure 9.4-7 Optical couplers: (a) switching power from one waveguide to another; (b) a 3-dB
coupler.
Switching by Control of Phase Mismatch
A waveguide coupler of fixed length, Zo = 2/2C for example, changes its power-
transfer ratio if a small phase mismatch АВ is introduced. Using (9.4-10b) and (9.4-7),
the power-transfer ratio TJ = P2(Lo)/P1(0) may be written as a function of АВ,
2 | 2
. 1 АВГ
Т = a sinc? |=4/1+ (A) , (9.4-13)
4 2 п Power-Transfer
Ratio
where sinc(x) = sin(72)/(72). Figure 9.4-8 illustrates the dependence of the power-
transfer ratio J on the mismatch parameter АВ Г. The ratio achieves a maximum
value of unity at АВ Lp = 0, decreases with increasing АВ Lo, and then vanishes
when ДВ Lo = V3.
w
21
Я
5
р Figure 9.4-8 Dependence of the power transfer
8 ratio TJ = P2(Lo)/P1(0) on the phase-mismatch
5 parameter АВ Го. The waveguide length is chosen
Е such that for АВ = 0 (the phase-matched case),
“о maximum power is transferred to waveguide 2,
= le, T= 1.
0 \Зл ie, J
Phase mismatch AZ Lo
The dependence of the transferred power on the phase mismatch can be utilized in
making electrically activated directional couplers. If the mismatch АВ Го is switched
between 0 and \/3 z, the light is switched from waveguide 2 to waveguide 1. Electrical
control of AG can be achieved if the material of the waveguides is electro-optic (1.е.,

382 CHAPTER 9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
if its refractive index can be altered by applying an electric field). Such devices will be
examined in Secs. 21.1D and 24.3B in connection with electro-optic switches.

[С] *Derivation of the Coupled Wave Equations. We proceed to derive the differential equations
(9.4-4) that govern the amplitudes a; (=) and a2(z) of the coupled modes. When the two waveguides
are not interacting they carry optical fields whose complex amplitudes are of the form

Ел (у, 2) = arui(y) exp(—j S12) (9.4-14a)

Eo(y, 2) = ази2(у) exp(—j ez). (9.4-14b)
The amplitudes a; and а> are then constant. In the presence of coupling, we assume that the am-
plitudes a; and aj become functions of = but the transverse functions и: (у) and w2(y), and the
propagation constants В and (3, are not altered. The amplitudes a, and ag are assumed to be slowly
varying functions of z in comparison with the distance 3~1 (the inverse of the propagation constant,
By or 3), which is of the order of magnitude of the wavelength of light.

The presence of waveguide 2 is regarded as a perturbation of the medium outside waveguide 1 in
the form of a slab of refractive index nz — n and width d at a distance 2a. The excess refractive index
(nz — п) and the field Ey correspond to an excess polarization density Р = (€2 — €)Ey = €,(n3 —
п?) Ey, which creates a source of optical radiation into waveguide 1 [see (5.2-25)] 81 = —1,0?P/Ot?
with complex amplitude

51 = Ном? P = мощ? (n3 —_ п?) Е = (n3 _ п?) Е
= (kj —k?) Ey. (9.4-15)
Here е2 and е are the electric permittivities associated with the refractive indices nz and п, respec-
tively, and kp = n2k,. This source is present only in the slab of waveguide 2.

To determine the effect of such a source on the field in waveguide 1, we write the Helmholtz
equation in the presence of a source as

УЕ + ВЕ, = —51 = - (№ — А) Ep. (9.4-16a)
We similarly write the Helmholtz equation for the wave in waveguide 2 with a source generated as a
result of the field in waveguide 1,

V? Ey + kj Ey = —55 = — (М — №) Ey, (9.4-16b)
where ky = п1Ко. Equations (9.4-16) are two coupled partial different equations that we solve to
determine F and E». This type of perturbation analysis is valid only for weakly coupled waveguides.

We now write Fi(y,z) = ai(z)ei(y,z) and Eo(y,z) = а2(2) е2(у, =), where e1(y,z) =
ил (у) exp(—jG1z) and eo(y,z) = и2(у)ехр(—7В22) and note that e; and e2 must satisfy the
Helmholtz equations,

Ve + ke, = 0 (9.4-17a)

Veo + keen = 0, (9.4-17b)
where ky = nk, and kp = nek, for points inside the slabs of waveguides 1 and 2, respectively, and
ky = ky = nk, elsewhere. Substituting Е. = а1е! into (9.4-16a), we obtain

a? a, da, de

— (Е . 9.4-18

422 + dz dz (1 ) ares ( )
Noting that a; varies slowly, whereas e; varies rapidly with z, we neglect the first term of (9.4-
18) in comparison with the second. The ratio between these terms is [(dW/dz)e,]/[2Wde,/dz] =
[(dW /dz)e1]/[2V(—7jBie1)] = j(dW/V)/26, dz where Ф = da,/dz. The approximation is valid if
dv /V < В, dz, 1.е., if the variation in a;(z) is slow in comparison with the length 81".

We proceed by substituting e; = u; exp(—j(1z) and e2 = изехр(—7 652) into (9.4-18). Ne-
glecting the first term leads to

dai /_. 9812 — 212 5822
2-7, (-78,) ur(y) e = — (№ — k*) ag ua(y)e . (9.4-19)

9.4 OPTICAL COUPLING INWAVEGUIDES 383

Multiplying both sides of (9.4-19) by u(y), integrating with respect to у, and using the fact that
u?(y) is normalized so that its integral is unity, we finally obtain

dan jo. = —jC21a2(z) е 182”, (9.4-20)

dz
where C2, is given by (9.4-6). A similar equation is obtained by repeating the procedure for wave-
guide 2. These equations yield the coupled differential equations (9.4-4). [|

*C. Waveguide Arrays

The foregoing analysis of light propagation in a pair of weakly coupled waveguides, as
presented in Sec. 9.4B, may be generalized to light propagation in waveguide arrays.
Consider an array of N identical parallel slab waveguides separated by equal distances,
under the assumption that the coupling is sufficiently weak so that only next-neighbor
coupling is significant.

If a,,(z) represents the complex amplitude of light in the nth waveguide, then the
set of № coupled-mode equations can be written as

da
i = —Jjl(dn4i+adn-1), n=1,...,N, (9.4-21)
z
where © is the coupling coefficient and ag = ay +, = 0. If the amplitudes are
represented by a vector a of dimension Л, comprising the elements {аи}, then (9.4-
21) may be expressed in matrix form as da/dz = —jHa, where H is an N x N matrix
whose elements are H,,,, = © form = п + 1, and zero otherwise. The solution to this
equation is a(z) = Та(0), where T = exp(—jzH) is the transmission matrix.

The transmission of light through such an array is best described in terms of modes
(see Appendix C). The modes of the waveguide array, known as supermodes, are to
be distinguished from the modes of individual isolated waveguides. The supermodes
are determined by diagonalizing the matrix H. This М x N matrix has N eigenvalues
A,, and corresponding eigenvectors b,. comprising the elements {b,.,}, given by

dy. = 2€ a bmn = /<—~ sin( 27” 1,2,...,N

„ = 2€cos{| |, Ош = 4/ ——— sin| |, r=1,2,...,N.
N+1 " N+1 N+1

(9.4-22)
The related transmission matrix T = exp(—jzH) has eigenvalues exp(—jA,z) and
the same eigenvectors b,. corresponding to N modes. If the initial amplitudes {a,,(0) }
are equal to the amplitudes {b,.,, } of the rth mode, they evolve in accordance with the
simple relation a,,(z) = a,,(0)e~4*"*, independent of the other modes. The associated
optical fields then propagate with a single propagation constant 3, = бо + A;, where
Во is the propagation constant in an isolated waveguide. Since —26 < A, < 26, the
propagation constants of the modes lie in the range бо — 26 < В, < Bo + 2€.

An arbitrary input distribution {a,,(0)} to the waveguide array can be expressed as
a superpositions of the modes, а„(0) = Ум W,Drn, Where w, = У аи (0),
are the superposition weights. The amplitudes at a distance z are then given by

N
an (2) = S > Wrbppe*. (9.4-23)
r=1
The modal analysis enables us to determine a,,(z) for arbitrary а (0).

384 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 9.4-1. Supermodes of Two Coupled Waveguides. For an array of two
coupled waveguides (NV = 2), Н = [& 6] and the transmission matrix T = exp(—jzH) =
eee ne], which reproduces (9.4-11). The two modes have eigenvalues Л, = +C
and corresponding propagation constants Во + ©. The eigenvectors are ws [1] апа я [1
corresponding to equal or opposite excitation of the two waveguides. An input field at a single
waveguide, say a(0) = [ 6] = 1 1] + 1 [4]: excites both supermodes, which have different
propagation constants, and the result is an exchange of power between the two waveguides.
«ПИ
Periodic Waveguides
In the limit of large №, the waveguide array may be regarded as a periodic medium and
the theory presented in Sec. 7.2 may be readily applied. In particular, it is instructive
to compare the dispersion diagram for light propagation in an isolated slab dielectric
waveguide to that for light propagation in an array with a finite number of parallel
slab waveguides, and to a periodic dielectric medium comprising an infinite set of such
waveguides. These diagrams are presented in Fig. 9.4-9. In the single-slab waveguide
[Fig. 9.4-9(a)], light travels in modes, each with a dispersion curve lying in the region
between the light lines w = c,8 and w = cof. At any frequency, there is at least one
mode. In an array of N waveguides [Fig. 9.4-9(b)], each dispersion curve splits into
N curves, representing the supermodes. The shapes of these curves are dependent on
the coupling coefficient ©, which is frequency dependent in accordance with (9.4-6).
In the periodic waveguide [Fig. 9.4-9(c)], the dispersion curves broaden into bands that
lie between the light lines, and the bands are separated by photonic bandgaps.
и АА a _ FA
| an =e. ===.
w ) > и -
— и - >”, Но
о oes SAA
Vy VY fo ” 7
ff he, 8 He
we и we AL 2 №0207
6 8 % 8 $ 3
(a) (b) (©)
Figure 9.4-9 (а) Dispersion diagram of a slab waveguide with cutoff angular frequency их. =
(п/а) (со/МА), as displayed in Fig. 9.2-8(a). (b) Dispersion diagram of the supermodes of a
waveguide array. (c) Dispersion diagram of a periodic waveguide with period A, spatial frequency
& = 2n/A, and Bragg angular frequency ws = (п/Л)(со/п), as shown in Fig. 7.2-7. Here, the
waves travel in the z direction, which is parallel to the layers, and the higher-index medium is denoted
т. In Fig. 7.2-7, in contrast, the direction parallel to the layers is the x direction and the higher-index
medium is denoted ng.

9.5 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL WAVEGUIDES 385
9.5 PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL WAVEGUIDES
Bragg-Grating Waveguide
We have seen earlier in this chapter that light may be guided by bouncing between
two parallel reflectors — e.g., planar mirrors as described in Sec. 9.1; or planar dielec-
tric boundaries at which the light undergoes total internal reflection, as described in
Sec. 9.2. Alternatively, Bragg grating reflectors (see Sec. 7.1C) may be used to guide
light, as illustrated in Fig. 9.5-1. The Bragg grating reflector (BGR) is a stack of al-
ternating dielectric layers that has special angle- and frequency-dependent reflectance.
For a given angle, the reflectance is close to unity at frequencies within a stop band.
Similarly, at a given frequency, the reflectance is close to unity within a range of angles,
but omnidirectional reflection is also possible. Thus, a wave with a given frequency
can be guided through the waveguide by repeated reflections within a range of bounce
angles. Within this angular range, the self-consistency condition is satisfied at a discrete
set of angles, each corresponding to a propagating mode. The field distribution of a
propagating mode is confined principally to the slab; decaying (evanescent) tails reach
into the adjacent grating layers, as illustrated in Fig. 9.5-1.
BGR I 22 р
7 $ Figure 9.5-1 Planar waveguide com-
Waveouide a TFA + prising а dielectric slab sandwiched
мым: between two Bragg-grating reflectors
Za р (BGRs).
BGRy}_——_______ р
т
Bragg-Grating Waveguide as a Photonic Crystal with a Defect Layer
If the upper and lower gratings of a Bragg-grating waveguide are identical, and the slab
thickness is comparable to the thickness of the periodic layers constituting the gratings,
then the entire medium may be regarded as a 1D periodic structure, 1.е., а 1D photonic
crystal, but with a defect. For example, the device shown in Fig. 9.5-1 is periodic
everywhere except for the slab, which is a layer of different thickness and/or different
refractive index; the slab may therefore be viewed as a “defective” layer. As described
in Sec. 7.2, a perfect photonic crystal has a dispersion relation, or energy-band diagram,
containing bandgaps within which no propagating modes exist. In the presence of the
“defective” layer, however, a mode whose frequency lies within the bandgap may exist,
but it is confined primarily within that layer. Such a mode corresponds to a frequency in
the dispersion diagram that lies within the photonic bandgap, as illustrated in Fig. 9.5-
2. Such a frequency is the analog of a defect energy level that lies within the bandgap
of a semiconductor crystal.
Figure 9.5-2 Dispersion diagram of a photonic
ОО ПИЯ crystal with a defect layer.
=<

386 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
20 Photonic-Crystal Waveguides
Waveguides may also be created by introducing a path of defects in a 2D photonic
crystal. In the example illustrated in Fig. 9.5-3(a), a 2D photonic crystal comprising a
set of parallel cylindrical holes, placed in a dielectric material at the points of a periodic
triangular lattice, exhibits a complete photonic bandgap for waves traveling along di-
rections parallel to the plane of periodicity (normal to the cylindrical holes). The defect
waveguide may take the form of a line of absent holes. A wave entering the waveguide
at frequencies within the photonic bandgap does not leak into the surrounding periodic
media so that the light is guided through the waveguide. A schematic profile of the
propagating mode is illustrated in Fig. 9.5-3(a).
<
LUG = oO LG eae
КЕ РЕ НТ КЕ АВ ЕР
are Gye 2g да та в 9
ЕЛЕ
| |
(a) (b)
Figure 9.5-3 (a) Propagating mode in a photonic-crystal waveguide. (b) An L-shaped photonic-
crystal waveguide.

Moreover, because of the omnidirectional nature of the photonic bandgap, light may
be guided through photonic-crystal waveguides with sharp bends and corners without
losing energy into the surrounding medium, as illustrated by the L-shaped waveguide
configuration shown in Fig. 9.5-3(b). Such behavior is not possible with conventional
dielectric waveguides based on total internal reflection.

9.6 PLASMONIC WAVEGUIDES

As demonstrated earlier in this chapter, it is difficult to confine a propagating wave
to dimensions much smaller than its wavelength (see also Sec. 4.4D). For the perfect-
mirror waveguide described in Sec. 9.1, it is demonstrated in Fig. 9.6-1(a) that a wave
of wavelength Л can be guided if the mirror separation 4 > 2/2, but it cannot be
guided if d is smaller. For the dielectric waveguide described in Sec. 9.2, it was shown
that if the slab width d is reduced below \/2, only a single guided mode is supported,
and as d is further reduced, the guided wave spreads substantially outside the slab and
into the surrounding dielectric medium (see Fig. 9.2-5).

Light can, however, be confined and guided at subwavelength spatial scales by
making use of metallic structures. As shown in Sec. 8.2B, a metal—dielectric boundary
supports a surface wave, called a surface plasmon polariton (SPP), that is tightly
confined to the boundary, with penetration depths on both sides of the boundary that
are much smaller than the wavelength [see Fig. 9.6-1(b)]. It will become apparent
below that an optical wave may be guided within an ultrathin dielectric slab embedded
in metal cladding if its width is much smaller than the wavelength, as illustrated in
Fig. 9.6-1(c). Under these conditions, the SPP waves at the two boundaries couple
with each other and combine into modes that extend through the dielectric medium.
Similarly, an ultrathin metallic film can guide an optical wave of subwavelength scale
[Fig. 9.6-1(d)].

9.6 PLASMONIC WAVEGUIDES 387

Other metal—dielectric structures with more complex configurations may also be
constructed to guide light through various optical circuits. As discussed in Sec. 8.2,
this branch of integrated photonics is called plasmonics. The propagation lengths of
plasmonic waveguides are limited by metallic losses.

(а) (b) (©) (d)
“
| a ; +
© Крету conn Wp м р т еочННИЫ
5“ И: мии oer | Wp --------- рЕЕЕНЕЕ

0 В 0 В 0 Bp в 9 Вр В
Figure 9.6-1 Configurations and dispersion relations for various optical and plasmonic
waveguides. (a) A perfect-mirror waveguide supports optical guided modes if its width d > A/2,
1е., if w > вх where их = mc/d is the cutoff frequency. (5) A metal-dielectric-metal waveguide
of width d < 2/2 does not support optical guided modes, but does support independent surface
plasmon polariton (SPP) waves at the two boundaries if w < ws, where и, = wp/V/1 4+ Ен, Wy 18
the plasma frequency of the metal, and €,; = €, /€, is the relative permittivity of the dielectric. (с) А
metal—insulator—metal (MIM) waveguide of width 4 < Л supports a symmetric guided mode w) for
Ws Зи < Wp, and an anti-symmetric mode w for w < wg. (а) A thin-metal slab of width d < 4,
called a metal-slab waveguide, supports two guided modes, one below w, and the other that extends
slightly above w,. For the plots in (с) and (а), 4 = ,/10, where A, = 27¢,/wp, and €,; = 2.25, so
that w, = 0.55 w,. The dashed blue curves represent the dispersion relation for the single-boundary
SPP wave. In (a)-(d) the dotted red lines are the dielectric-medium light lines w = сб.
Metal-Insulator—Metal Waveguide
A dielectric slab surrounded by metal claddings forms a metal—dielectric—metal, or
metal-insulator—metal (MIM) waveguide. If the slab thickness is greater than twice
the penetration depth of the SPP waves at the boundaries [see (8.2-22)], the structure
supports two independent SPP waves [Fig. 9.6-1(b)]. For a thinner dielectric slab, these
surface waves overlap and couple, splitting the SPP dispersion curve into two branches
and thereby creating two distinct guided modes, labeled «С and w) in Fig. 9.6-
l(c). These modes correspond to anti-symmetric and symmetric field distributions,
respectively.

The dispersion relations for these two modes may be derived by matching the
boundary conditions at the metal—dielectric interfaces, much as was done for the di-
electric waveguide (Sec. 9.2). The result for the TM wave is similar to (9.2-4) for the
dielectric waveguide:

d Е а Е
фай | —y, | = _-t 38. coth| = | = _- 72 (9.6-1)
2 € V1 2 €2 1
with
1 = МВ? —wrye, = VB? “ре, (9.6-2)
where е1 and ео are the permittivities of the dielectric and metal materials, respectively.
This dispersion relation is plotted in Fig. 9.6-1(c) for a metal described by the Drude

388 — CHAPTER9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
model, е› = €o(1 — w?/w*), where w, is the bulk-metal plasma frequency. Note that
the upper branch of the dispersion curve crosses the light line, indicating that the wave
travels at a phase velocity greater than the velocity of light c in the dielectric medium.
Since the two branches of the dispersion relation extend over the frequency range
0 < w < wy, a wave at any frequency w < w, can be guided in dielectric slabs that
are significantly smaller than the wavelength. Modes at near-infrared wavelengths, for
example, can be localized at the nanometer scale.
Metal-Slab Waveguide
Similarly, a thin metallic film of width 4 < Л embedded in a dielectric medium can
serve as a plasmonic waveguide [Fig. 9.6-1(d)]. If the film thickness is smaller than
the penetration depth of the SPP waves from the boundaries into the metal, then these
waves overlap and coalesce into two distinct waveguide modes. Again, the dispersion
relation may be obtained by matching the boundary conditions, yielding
d € d €
tanh ($2) =_= 32. coth( $2) = 2 (9.6-3)
2 €2 V1 2 €2 V1
where 7; and ‘2 are given by (9.6-2) and, as before, €, and е2 are the permittivities of
the dielectric and metal materials, respectively. The Drude model for the metal is again
characterized by €2 = в. (1—2 /w*). Note that (9.6-3) is the same as (9.6-1) except that
the subscripts 1 and 2 are interchanged on the left-hand sides of both equations. This
dispersion relation is plotted in Fig. 9.6-1(d). As with the MIM waveguide considered
above, the dispersion relation for the SPP at a single metal—dielectric boundary splits
into two branches, corresponding to symmetric and anti-symmetric modes; in this case
both lie below the light line for the bulk dielectric material w = сВ.
* Periodic Metal_—Dielectric Arrays
A periodic structure comprising an array of metal—dielectric slabs functions as a pho-
tonic crystal. In analogy with the all-dielectric arrays discussed in Chapter 7, and
illustrated in Figs. 9.4-9(a) and (с), the dispersion curve of the single metal—dielectric
boundary depicted as the dashed blue curve in Fig. 9.6-2(b) splits to create bands, as
shown. The frequency w of a mode with propagation constant В may only lie within
two separated spectral bands, both of which are within the range w < wp.
и wy х
- Dielectric 61 >.
Metal €2 Ws В —
ui Bp в
Figure 9.6-2 Metal—insulator periodic structure and its dispersion relation for light traveling in
the direction of the layers. Two bands lie within the w < w, frequency range. The dashed blue curve
in (5) is the dispersion relation for the single-boundary SPP wave and the dotted red lines are the
free-space and dielectric-medium light lines.

READING LIST 389
READING LIST

Books and Seminal Articles

See also the reading list on layered and periodic media in Chapter 7, the reading list in Chapter 10,
and the reading list on photonic integrated circuits in Chapter 25.

S. Bhadra and A. Ghatak, eds., Guided Wave Optics and Photonic Devices, CRC Press/Taylor &
Francis, 2013.

Г. М. Binh, Guided Wave Photonics: Fundamentals and Applications with MATLAB, CRC Press/Taylor
& Francis, 2012.

р. Dai, J. Bauters, and J. Е. Bowers, Passive Technologies for Future Large-Scale Photonic Integrated
Circuits on Silicon: Polarization Handling, Light Non-Reciprocity and Loss Reduction, Light:
Science & Applications (2012) 1, e1; doi:10.1038/lsa.2012.1

R. G. Hunsperger, Integrated Optics: Theory and Technology, Springer-Verlag, 1982, 6th ed. 2010.

J. Bures, Guided Optics, Wiley-VCH, 2009.

C.-L. Chen, Foundations for Guided Wave Optics, Wiley, 2007.

K. Iga and Y. Kokobun, eds., Encyclopedic Handbook of Integrated Optics, CRC Press/Taylor &
Francis, 2006.

K. Okamoto, Fundamentals of Optical Waveguides, Elsevier, 2nd ed. 2005.

J.-M. Liu, Photonic Devices, Cambridge University Press, 2005, paperback ed. 2009.

G. Lifante, Integrated Photonics: Fundamentals, Wiley, 2003.

C. Pollock and M. Lipson, Integrated Photonics, Kluwer, 2003.

A. A. Barybin and V. A. Dmitriev, Modern Electrodynamics and Coupled-Mode Theory: Application
to Guided-Wave Optics, Rinton Press, 2002.

К. lizuka, Elements of Photonics, Volume 2: For Fiber and Integrated Optics, Wiley, 2002.

M. Young, Optics and Lasers: Including Fibers and Optical Waveguides, Springer-Verlag, 5th ed.
2000.

А. В. Mickelson, Guided Wave Optics, Springer-Verlag, 1993, paperback ed. 2012.

К. J. Ebeling, Integrated Optoelectronics: Waveguide Optics, Photonics, Semiconductors, Springer-
Verlag, 1993, paperback ed. 2011.

D. G. Hall, ed., Selected Papers on Coupled Mode Theory in Guided-Wave Optics, SPIE Optical
Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 84), 1993.

D. Marcuse, Theory of Dielectric Optical Waveguides, Academic Press, 1974, 2nd ed. 1991.

PROBLEMS

9.1-3 Field Distribution.

(a) Demonstrate that a single TEM plane wave E,,(y, z)=A exp(—jkyy) exp(—j@z) cannot
satisfy the boundary conditions, Е.,(+4/2, =) = 0 at all z, for the mirror waveguide
illustrated in Fig. 9.1-1.

(b) Show that the sum of two TEM plane waves written as Е,(у,2) = А: exp(—jky1y)
ехр(—7812) + As exp(—jky2y) exp(—JjG2z) does not satisfy the boundary conditions if
A; = А», 8; = Bo, and ky; = —Ку2 = ma/d where т = 1,2,....

9.1-4 Modal Dispersion. Light of wavelength Л, = 0.633 ym is transmitted through a mirror

waveguide of mirror separation d = 10 ит and п = 1. Determine the number of TE and

TM modes. Determine the group velocities of the fastest and the slowest modes. If a narrow

pulse of light is carried by all modes for a distance | m in the waveguide, how much does the
pulse spread as a result of the differences of the group velocities?

9.2-3 Parameters of a Dielectric Waveguide. Light of free-space wavelength Л. = 0.87 jum is

guided by a thin planar film of width d = 2 ym and refractive index п: = 1.6 surrounded by

a medium of refractive index ng = 1.4.

(a) Determine the critical angle 9. and its complement 6., the numerical aperture NA, and
the maximum acceptance angle for light originating in air (n = 1).

390 — СНАРТЕВ9 GUIDED-WAVE OPTICS
(b) Determine the number of TE modes.

(c) Determine the bounce angle @ and the group velocity v of the m = 0 TE mode.

9.2-4 Effect of Cladding. Redo Prob. 9.2-3 under the proviso that the thin film is suspended in air
(nz = 1). Compare the results.

9.2-5 Field Distribution. The transverse distribution ит, (у) of the electric-field complex amplitude
of a TE mode in a slab waveguide is given by (9.2-10) and (9.2-13). Derive an expression for
the ratio of the proportionality constants. Plot the distribution of the m = 0 TE mode for a
slab waveguide with parameters п: = 1.48, no = 1.46, а = 0.5 ит, and A, = 0.85 wm, and
determine its confinement factor (percentage of power in the slab).

9.2-6 Derivation of the Field Distributions Using Maxwell’s Equations. Assuming that the
electric field in a symmetric dielectric waveguide is harmonic within the slab and exponential
outside the slab and has a propagation constant В in both media, we may write Е,(у, =) =
u(y) е 782, where

Acos(kyy+y), —d/2<y<d/2
u(y) = 4 Bexp(—yy), y>d/2
Bexp(yy), у< 94/2.
Satisfying the Helmholtz equation requires kj + 6? = то and —7? + 6? = n5k3.
Use Maxwell’s equations to derive expressions for H,(y,z) and H.(y, =). Show that the
boundary conditions are satisfied if В, y, and К, take the values Bm, Ym, and Kym derived in
the text and verify the self-consistency condition (9.2-4).

9.2-7 Single-Mode Waveguide. What is the largest thickness d of a planar symmetric dielectric
waveguide with refractive indices п: = 1.50 and nz = 1.46 for which there is only one TE
mode at A, = 1.3 wm? What is the number of modes if a waveguide with this thickness is
used at A, = 0.85 jum instead?

9.2-8 Mode Cutoff. Show that the cutoff condition for TE mode m > 0 in a symmetric slab
waveguide with пт = nz is approximately 2 x 8n,An 4? /т?, where An = 71 — no.

9.2-9 TM Mode Bounce Angles. Derive an expression for the bounce angles of the TM modes
similar to (9.2-4). Generate a plot similar to Fig. 9.2-2 for TM modes in a waveguide with
sin 0. = 0.3 and \/2d = 0.1. What is the number of TM modes?

9.3-1 Modes of a Rectangular Dielectric Waveguide. A rectangular dielectric waveguide has а
square cross section of area 10-2 mm? and numerical aperture NA = 0.1. Use (9.3-3) to plot
the number of TE modes as a function of frequency v. Compare your results with Fig. 9.2-4.

9.4-1 Coupling Coefficient Between Two Slabs.

(a) Use (9.4-6) to determine the coupling coefficient between two identical slab waveguides
of width d = 0.5 wm, spacing 2a = 1.0 yum, and refractive indices ny = ng = 1.48, in
a medium of refractive index п, = 1.46, at Л, = 0.85 ит. Assume that both waveguides
are operating in the m = 0 TE mode and use the results of Prob. 9.2-5 to determine the
transverse distributions.
(b) Determine the length of the waveguides that makes the device act as a 3-dB coupler.
*9.6-1 Silver-Slab Waveguide. Calculate and plot the dispersion relation for the symmetric and
anti-symmetric modes of a silver-slab waveguide of thickness d = 20 nm in a host medium
of frequency-independent refractive index ng = 2. Assume that the permittivity of silver is
described by the Drude model (8.2-18), with a plasma frequency w, corresponding to a free-
space wavelength of 138 nm. Determine the properties (velocity, propagation wavelength,
and penetration depths) of the symmetric mode at a free-space wavelength of 400 nm. Com-
pare these properties with those of a SPP propagating on a single interface between silver
and the same host medium.

CHAPTER
eee
10.1 GUIDED RAYS 393

A. Step-Index Fibers

В. Graded-Index Fibers
10.2 GUIDED WAVES 397

A. Step-Index Fibers

B. Single-Mode Fibers

*C. Quasi-Plane Waves in Step-Index and Graded-Index Fibers

D. Multicore Fibers and Fiber Couplers
10.3 ATTENUATION AND DISPERSION 415

A. Attenuation

B. Dispersion
10.4 HOLEY AND PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL FIBERS 426
10.5 FIBER MATERIALS 429

oa f
ye /-
, 95 в,
— | Е
= о ы Е 2 м
Working at Corning in the early 1970s, Peter С. Schultz (born 1942), left, Donald В. Keck (born
1941), center, and Robert D. Maurer (born 1924), right, developed ultra-low-loss silica-glass optical
fibers that permitted light to propagate over exceptionally long distances, thereby paving the way for
worldwide optical fiber communications. Billions of kilometers of optical fiber span the globe.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
391

CSC
Fiber optics is an enabling technology for telecommunications, data transmission, and
information science. The availability of ultra-low-loss optical fibers is, in large part,
responsible for the commercial viability of optical fiber communications.

An optical fiber is a cylindrical dielectric waveguide fabricated from a low-loss ma-
terial such as silica glass. It has a central core in which the light is guided, embedded in
an outer cladding of slightly lower refractive index (Fig. 10.0-1). Light rays in the core
incident on the core—cladding boundary at angles greater than the critical angle undergo
total internal reflection and are thereby guided through the core without refraction into
the cladding and without loss. Rays at greater inclination to the fiber axis lose a portion
of their power into the cladding at each reflection and are not guided.

и >. Cladding Ny < ny Wi
( ) Ty Core ny 4
Figure 10.0-1 An optical fiber is a cylindrical dielectric waveguide with an inner core and an outer
cladding of refractive index lower than that of the core.

Technological advances in the fabrication of optical fibers over the past several
decades allow light to be guided through 1 km of silica-glass fiber with a loss as
low as = 0.15 dB (= 3.4%) at the wavelength of maximum transparency. Because
of this low loss, silica-glass optical fibers long ago replaced copper coaxial cables as
the preferred transmission medium for terrestrial and sub-oceanic voice as well as for
data communications. In recent years, optical fibers have transcended their monolithic
silica-glass origins and have come to play a central role in the arenas of sensing,
security, transportation, defense, and biomedicine. This has been facilitated by the
development of photonic-crystal, specialty, multimaterial, and multifunctional optical
fibers.

In this chapter we introduce the principles of light transmission in optical fibers.
These principles are essentially the same as those applicable to planar dielectric wave-
guides (Chapter 9); the most notable distinction is that optical fibers have cylindrical
geometry. In both types of waveguide, light propagates in the form of modes. Each
mode travels along the axis of the waveguide with a distinct propagation constant and
group velocity, maintaining its transverse spatial distribution and polarization. When
the core diameter is small, only a single mode is supported and the optical fiber is said
to be a single-mode fiber.

Optical fibers with large core diameters are multimode fibers. One of the difficulties
associated with the propagation of light in multimode fibers arises from the differences
among the group velocities of the modes. This results in a spread of travel times and
leads to the broadening of a light pulse as it travels through the fiber. This effect, called
modal dispersion, limits the rate at which adjacent pulses can be launched without
resulting in pulse overlap at the far end of the fiber. Modal dispersion therefore limits
the speed at which multimode optical fiber communication systems can operate.

Modal dispersion can be reduced by grading the refractive index of the fiber core
from a maximum value at its center to a minimum value at the core—cladding boundary.
The fiber is then called a graded-index fiber, or GRIN fiber, whereas conventional
fibers with constant refractive indices in the core and the cladding are known as step-
index fibers. In a graded-index fiber the travel velocity increases with radial distance
from the core axis (since the refractive index decreases). Although rays of greater
inclination to the fiber axis must travel farther, they travel faster. This permits the travel
times of the different modes to be equalized.

392

10.1 GUIDEDRAYS 393
Optical fibers are thus classified as step-index or graded-index, and multimode or
single-mode, as illustrated in Fig. 10.0-2.
Step-Index MMF ny
SMF ny
of
GRIN MMF ny
Figure 10.0-2 Geometry, refractive-index profile, and typical rays in a step-index multimode fiber
(MMF), a single-mode fiber (SMF), and a graded-index multimode fiber (GRIN MMF).
This Chapter
The chapter begins with ray-optics descriptions of step-index and graded-index fibers
(Sec. 10.1). An electromagnetic-optics approach, which highlights the nature of
optical modes and single-mode propagation, follows in Sec. 10.2. In the simplified
approximate approach set forth in Sec. 10.2C, the field is treated as a quasi-plane wave
in analogy with the bouncing plane-wave construct for planar dielectric waveguides
considered in Sec. 9.2. The optical properties of the fiber material (often fused
silica), including attenuation and material dispersion as well as modal, waveguide,
polarization-mode, and nonlinear dispersion, are presented in Sec. 10.3. Holey and
photonic-crystal fibers, which have more complex refractive-index profiles, along with
unusual dispersion characteristics, are introduced in Sec. 10.4. Finally, multimaterial
and multifunctional fibers, including mid-infrared and specialty fibers, are considered
in Sec. 10.5. We return to a discussion of fiber optics in Chapters 23 and 25, which are
devoted to ultrafast optics and optical fiber communications, respectively.
10.1 GUIDED RAYS
A. Step-Index Fibers
A step-index fiber is a cylindrical dielectric waveguide specified by the refractive
indices of its core and cladding, пл and ne, respectively, and their radii a and b
(see Fig. 10.0-1). Examples of standard core-to-cladding diameter ratios (in units of
pom / jum) are 2а/26 = 8/125, 50/125, 62.5/125, 85/125, and 100/140. The refractive
indices of the core and cladding differ only slightly, so that the fractional refractive-
index change is small:
2_ 2 _
Aste 1, (10.1-1)
21 ny
Most fibers used in currently implemented optical fiber communication systems are
made of fused silica glass (SiO2) of high chemical purity. Slight changes in the refrac-
tive index are effected by adding low concentrations of doping materials (e.g., titanium,

394 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
germanium, boron). The refractive index n, ranges from 1.44 to 1.46, depending on
the wavelength, and A typically lies between 0.001 and 0.02.

An optical ray in a step-index fiber is guided by total internal reflections within the
fiber core if its angle of incidence at the core—cladding boundary is greater than the
critical angle 9. = sin“! (ng /пл), and remains so as the ray bounces.

Meridional Rays
Meridional rays, which are rays confined to planes that pass through the fiber axis,
have a particularly simple guiding condition, as illustrated in Fig. 10.1-1. These rays
intersect the fiber axis and reflect in the same plane without changing their angle of
incidence, behaving as if they were in a planar waveguide. Meridional rays are guided
if the angle 0 they make with the fiber axis is smaller than the complement of the
critical angle, 1.е., if 0 < 0. = 7/2—0,. = cos !(ng/n1). Since пл = no, 0. is usually
small and the guided rays are approximately paraxial.
Meridional

bi a
Figure 10.1-1 The trajectory of a meridional ray lies in a plane that passes through the fiber axis.
The ray is guided if 0 < 0. = cos! (ng/n1).
Skewed Rays
An arbitrary ray is identified by its plane of incidence, which is a plane parallel to the
fiber axis through which the ray passes, and by the angle with that axis, as illustrated in
Fig. 10.1-2. The plane of incidence intersects the core—cladding cylindrical boundary
at an angle ф with respect to the normal to the boundary and lies at a distance В from
the fiber axis. The ray is identified by its angle 9 with the fiber axis and by the angle
ф of its plane. When ¢ 4 0 (В & 0) the ray is said to be skewed. For meridional rays
ф = Оапа R=0.

A skewed ray reflects repeatedly into planes that make the same angle @ with the
core—cladding boundary; it follows a helical trajectory confined within a cylindrical
shell of inner and outer radii В and a, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 10.1-2. The
projection of the trajectory onto the transverse (x—y) plane is a regular polygon that is
not necessarily closed. The condition for a skewed ray to always undergo total internal
reflection is that its angle with the z axis be smaller than the complementary critical
angle, 1.е., 9 < 0..

№
Хх \/
\ JA NN
WS
Figure 10.1-2 A skewed ray lies in a plane offset from the fiber axis by a distance R. The ray
is identified by the angles @ and ¢. It follows a helical trajectory confined within a cylindrical shell
with inner and outer radii R and a, respectively. The projection of the ray on the transverse plane is a
regular polygon that is not necessarily closed.

10.4 GUIDEDRAYS 395
Numerical Aperture
A ray incident from air into the fiber becomes a guided ray if, upon refraction into
the core, it makes an angle 9 with the fiber axis that is smaller than 9. As shown
in Fig. 10.1-3(a), if Snell’s law is applied at the air-core boundary, the angle 6, in
air corresponding to the angle @, in the core is obtained from 1 - sin@, = пл sin бе,
which leads to sin#, = т\УТ- cos? 0. = mr/1— (n2/n1)? = /n? — n3 (see
Exercise 1.2-5). The acceptance angle of the fiber is therefore
6, = зш "МА, (10.1-2)
where the numerical aperture (NA) of the fiber is given Бу
МА = /n? —n3 = V2A (10.1-3)
Numerical Aperture
since ny — ng = nyA and пл + 72 & 2n4.

The acceptance angle 0, of the fiber determines the cone of external rays that are
guided by the fiber. Rays incident at angles greater than 6, are refracted into the
fiber but are guided only for a short distance since they do not undergo total internal
reflection. The numerical aperture therefore describes the light-gathering capacity of
the fiber, as illustrated in Fig. 10.1-3(6).

When the guided rays arrive at the terminus of the fiber, they are refracted back
into a cone of angle 6,. The acceptance angle is thus a crucial design parameter for
coupling light into and out of a fiber.

Acceptance Г Unguided ray Guided ray
cone \ |
== YW
(a)
(b) Large NA

Figure 10.1-3 (a) The acceptance angle @, of a fiber. Rays within the acceptance cone are guided
by total internal reflection. The numerical aperture NA = sin 6,. The angles 6, and 0, are typically
quite small; they are exaggerated here for clarity. (b) The light-gathering capacity of a large NA fiber
is greater than that of a small NA fiber.
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 10.1-1. Cladded and Uncladded Fibers. In а silica-glass fiber with пл = 1.46
and A = (п! — ng)/n, = 0.01, the complementary critical angle 0. = cos~!(nz/n1) = 8.1°,
and the acceptance angle 9, = 11.9°, corresponding to a numerical aperture NA = 0.206. By
comparison, a fiber with silica-glass core (п: = 1.46) and a cladding with a much smaller refractive
index ng = 1.064 has 6. = 43.2°, 9, = 90°, and МА = 1. Rays incident from all directions
are guided since they reflect within a cone of angle 9. = 43.2° inside the core. Likewise, for an
uncladded fiber (ng = 1), 0. = 46.8°, and rays incident from air at any angle are also refracted
into guided rays. Although its light-gathering capacity is high, the uncladded fiber is generally not
suitable for use as an optical waveguide because of the large number of modes it supports, as will be
explained subsequently.
ПОНИ

396 — СНАРТЕВ 10 FIBER OPTICS

В. Graded-Index Fibers

Index grading is an ingenious method for reducing the pulse spreading caused by
differences in the group velocities of the modes in a multimode fiber. The core of a
graded-index (GRIN) fiber has a refractive index that varies; it is highest in the center of
the fiber and decreases gradually to its lowest value where the core meets the cladding.
The phase velocity of light is therefore minimum at the center and increases gradually
with radial distance. Rays of the most axial mode thus travel the shortest distance,
but they do so at the smallest phase velocity. Rays of the most oblique mode zigzag
at a greater angle and travel a longer distance, but mostly in a medium where the
phase velocity is high. The disparities in distances are thus compensated by opposite
disparities in the phase velocities. As a consequence, the differences in the travel times
associated with a light pulse are reduced. In this section we examine the propagation
of light in GRIN fibers.

The core refractive index of a GRIN fiber is a function n(r) of the radial position г.
As illustrated in Fig. 10.1-4, the largest value of n(r) is at the core center, n(0) = nj,
while the smallest value occurs at the core radius, n(a) = п2. The cladding refractive
index is maintained constant at no.

Cladding] ig)
' om oe Figure 10.1-4 Geometry and refractive-
бы index profile of a graded-index optical fiber.

A versatile refractive-index profile that exhibits this generic behavior is described
by the power-law function

T\P
n2(r) = п2 В —2 (^) A ‚ г<а, (10.1-4)
а
where
2 2
тт —п т -п
ДЕ. (10.1-5)
211 ny
The grade profile parameter p determines the steepness of the profile. As illustrated
in Fig. 10.1-5, n?(r) is a linear function of г for p = 1 and a quadratic function
for p = 2. The quantity 7? (г) becomes increasingly steep as р becomes larger, and
ultimately approaches a step function for р — oo. The step-index fiber is thus a special
case of the GRIN fiber.
2
ue 1 Figure 10.1-5 Power-law refractive-index
6 ии profile п? (г) for various values of р.
eR т

The transmission of light rays through a GRIN medium with parabolic-index profile
was discussed in Sec. 1.3. Rays in meridional planes follow oscillatory planar trajecto-
ries, whereas skewed rays follow helical trajectories. For an arbitrary refractive-index

10.2 GUIDEDWAVES 397
profile, the turning points form cylindrical caustic surfaces, as illustrated in Fig. 10.1-6.
Guided rays are confined within the core and do not reach the cladding.

“вы РУ
—“ LZ en \ ete Toke SI 2 Or, Ra r
(a) a „2 -. coe XL ane а
1 t . a oot ewe
woe /.---77 гау

Figure 10.1-6 Guided rays in the core of a GRIN fiber. (а) А meridional ray confined to а
meridional plane inside a cylinder of radius Ro. (b) A skewed ray follows a helical trajectory confined
within two cylindrical shells of radii т; and Ау. For a parabolic-index profile, the trajectory projects
to a stationary ellipse, as in Fig. 1.3-7.

The numerical aperture of a GRIN optical fiber may be determined by identifying the
largest angle of the incident ray that is guided within the GRIN core without reaching
the cladding. For meridional rays in a GRIN fiber with parabolic profile, the numerical
aperture is given by (10.1-3) (see Exercise 1.3-2).

10.2 GUIDED WAVES
We now proceed to develop an electromagnetic-optics theory of light propagation in
fibers. We seek to determine the electric and magnetic fields of guided waves by using
Maxwell’s equations and the boundary conditions imposed by the cylindrical dielectric
core and cladding. As with all waveguides, there are certain special solutions, known
as modes (see Appendix C), each of which has a distinct propagation constant, a char-
acteristic field distribution in the transverse plane, and two independent polarization
states. Since an exact solution is rather difficult, a number of approximations will be
used.
Helmholtz Equation
The optical fiber is a dielectric medium with refractive index n(r). In a step-index fiber,
n(r) = п1 in the core (т < a) and n(r) = ng in the cladding (г > a). In a GRIN fiber,
п(г) is a continuous function in the core and has a constant value n(r) = ng in the
cladding. In either case, we assume that the outer radius 6 of the cladding is sufficiently
large so that it can be taken to be infinite when considering guided light in the core and
near the core—cladding boundary.

Each of the components of the monochromatic electric and magnetic fields obeys
the Helmholtz equation, V?U + n?(r)k2U = 0, where k, = 277/Xo. This equation is
obeyed exactly in each of the two regions of the step-index fiber, and is obeyed approx-
imately within the core of the GRIN fiber if n(7) varies slowly within a wavelength (see

398 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
Хх
Er
о < a
/ \ aa. a Figure 10.2-1 Cylindrical fiber coor-
i т if т dinate system.
1 и | / <
y NU? NU”
Sec. 5.3). In a cylindrical coordinate system (see Fig. 10.2-1) the Helmholtz equation
is written as
920 100 1900 90 ,
~22 44227 4 2 КИ =0, 10.2-1
a тд Poe apt” ( )
where U = U(r, $, 2). The guided modes are waves traveling in the z direction with
propagation constant В, so that the z dependence of U is of the form eI", They are
periodic in the angle ¢ with period 27, so that they take the harmonic form e~/!*, where
11$ an integer. Substituting
U(r, ¢,z) = и(г)е Фе 1, 1 =0,+1,+2,... (10.2-2)
into (10.2-1) leads to an ordinary differential equation for the radial profile u(r):
Фи idu 2 2 » +E
Tetra? (n (r)k5 — В -2 и = 0. (10.2-3)
А. Step-Index Fibers
As we discovered in Sec. 9.2B, the wave is guided (or bound) if the propagation
constant is smaller than the wavenumber in the core (В < n ,k,) and greater than
the wavenumber in the cladding (В > п2Ко). It is therefore convenient to define the
quantities
kz, = nik? — В? (10.2-4a)
and
52 = 62 — пак, (10.2-4b)
so that, for guided waves, k7, and 7 are positive and ky and ¥ are real. Equation (10.2-
3) may then be written in the core and cladding separately:
du idu I?
ета + (в _ =) u=0, r<a_ (core), (10.2-5a)
@u  idu » EP .
[УИ ]|и=0, т>а (cladding).  (10.2-56)
4? таг 72
Equations (10.2-5) are well-known differential equations whose solutions comprise
the family of Bessel functions. Excluding functions that approach oo at r = 0 in the

10.2 GUIDEDWAVES 399
core, or at r — oo in the cladding, we obtain the bounded solutions:
Л(Етт), т<а (соге)
u(r) « . 10.2-6
(r) | Ki(yr), т>а (cladding), ( )
where Л(х) is the Bessel function of the first kind and order 1, and K)(x) is the
modified Bessel function of the second kind and order 1. The function J; (x) oscillates
like the sine or cosine function but with a decaying amplitude. The function A;)(2)
decays exponentially at large т. Two representative examples of the radial distribution
u(r) are displayed in Fig. 10.2-2.
и “0
Jo(krr)
7 J3(kpr)
Kor) J Baty)
°9 a r 95 a r
Figure 10.2-2 Examples of the radial distribution u(r) provided in (10.2-6) for 1 = 0 and / = 3.
The shaded and unshaded areas represent the fiber core and cladding, respectively. The parameters
ky and 7, and the two proportionality constants in (10.2-6), have been selected such that u(r) is
continuous and has a continuous derivative at т = a. Larger values of kr and 7¥ lead to a greater
number of oscillations in u(r).

The parameters Ат and ^у determine the rate of change of u(r) in the core and in
the cladding, respectively. A large value of ky means more oscillation of the radial
distribution in the core. A large value of ~ means more rapid decay and therefore
smaller penetration of the wave into the cladding. As can be seen from (10.2-4), the
sum of the squares of Ат and 7+ is a constant:

kp + = (т —n3) ke = (МА)? - ke, (10.2-7)
so that as kp increases, y decreases and the field penetrates more deeply into the
cladding. For those values of Кт that exceed МА - Ко, the quantity 7 becomes imaginary
and the wave ceases to be bound to the core.

Fiber V Parameter
It is convenient to normalize Ат and + by defining the quantities
Х =kra, У =a. (10.2-8)
In view of (10.2-7), we have
X?4Y%=V?, (10.2-9)
where V = NA- k,a, from which
a
У =27— NA. (10.2-10)
Л V Parameter

400 CHAPTER10 FIBER OPTICS
It is important to recall that for the wave to be guided, X must be smaller than V.

As we shall see shortly, V is an important parameter that governs the number of
modes of the fiber and their propagation constants. It is called the fiber parameter or
the У parameter. It is directly proportional to the radius-to-wavelength ratio a/A,, and
to the numerical aperture NA. Equation (10.2-10) is not unlike (9.2-7) for the number
of TE modes in a planar dielectric waveguide.

Modes

We now consider the boundary conditions. We begin by writing the axial components
of the electric- and magnetic-field complex amplitudes, Е, and H,, in the form of
(10.2-2). The condition that these components must be continuous at the core—cladding
boundary r = a establishes a relation between the coefficients of proportionality in
(10.2-6), so that we have only one unknown for Е’, and one unknown for H,. With the
help of Maxwell’s equations, jwe,n?E = V x H and —jwy,H = V x E [see (5.3-
12) and (5.3-13), respectively], the remaining four components, Ey, Hy, В», and H,.,
are determined in terms of Е, and H,. Continuity of Ех and Hy at r = a yields two
additional equations. One equation relates the two unknown coefficients of proportion-
ality in Е, and H,; the other provides a condition that the propagation constant В must
satisfy. This condition, called the characteristic equation or dispersion relation, is
an equation for В with the ratio а/Ло and the fiber indices пл, 72 as known parameters.

For each azimuthal index /, the characteristic equation has multiple solutions yield-
ing discrete propagation constants Ви, т = 1,2,..., each solution representing a
mode. The corresponding values of Кт and 7, which govern the spatial distributions
in the core and in the cladding, respectively, are determined by using (10.2-4) and
are denoted Кти, and ym. A mode is therefore described by the indices [ and т,
characterizing its azimuthal and radial distributions, respectively. The function u(r)
depends on both / and т; Г = 0 corresponds to meridional rays. Moreover, there are
two independent configurations of the E and H vectors for each mode, corresponding
to the two states of polarization. The classification and labeling of these configurations
are generally quite involved (details are provided in specialized books in the reading
list).

Characteristic Equation (Weakly Guiding Fiber)

Most fibers are weakly guiding (i.e., пл & nz or А < 1) so that the guided rays are
paraxial, 1.е., approximately parallel to the fiber axis. The longitudinal components of
the electric and magnetic fields are then far weaker than the transverse components and
the guided waves are approximately transverse electromagnetic (TEM) in nature. The
linear polarization in the x and y directions then form orthogonal states of polarization.
The linearly polarized (LP) mode with indices (1, 7%) is usually labeled as the ГР»
mode. The two polarizations of mode (1, т) travel with the same propagation constant
and have the same spatial distribution.

For weakly guiding fibers the characteristic equation obtained using the procedure
outlined earlier turns out to be approximately equivalent to the conditions that the
scalar function u(r) in (10.2-6) is continuous and has a continuous derivative at r = a.
These two conditions are satisfied if

(kra)J{(kra) _ (ya) K{(ya) 02-1)
Л(Кта) К (ya)
The derivatives Л’ and Ку of the Bessel functions satisfy the identities
Ji(x) = Л (x) = pte) (10.2-12)

10.2 GUIDEDWAVES 401

Kj (a) = —Kigi(x) + Aue) (10.2-13)

Substituting these identities into (10.2-11) and using the normalized parameters X =
Кта and У = ya leads to the characteristic equation

x Fi) _ zy Kal) Y = МУ? — Х?. (10.2-14)

Ji(X) KY) Characteristic

Equation

Given М and I, the characteristic equation contains a single unknown variable X.

Note that J_)(x) = (-1)'.Л(2) and K_)(x) = Ккх), so that the equation remains

unchanged if 11$ replaced by —l.

The characteristic equation may be solved graphically by plotting its right- and
left-hand sides (RHS and LHS, respectively) versus X and finding the intersections.
As illustrated in Fig. 10.2-3 for [ = 0, the LHS has multiple branches whereas the
right-hand side decreases monotonically with increasing X until it vanishes at X = М
(У = 0). There are therefore multiple intersections in the interval 0 < X < V. Each
intersection point corresponds to a fiber mode with a distinct value of X. These values
are denoted Х т, т = 1,2,..., Муш order of increasing X. Once the Xj, are found,
(10.2-8), (10.2-4), and (10.2-6) allow us to determine the corresponding transverse
propagation constants kim, the decay parameters 7, the propagation constants Вут,
and the radial distribution functions и (г). The graph in Fig. 10.2-3 is similar in char-
acter to that in Fig. 9.2-2, which governs the modes of a planar dielectric waveguide.

LHS = ХИ
JX)
-------- И № внз = "КУ,
о KY)
ом
ШИ в: | | ii N
0 2 4 6 8 и X
Figure 10.2-3 Graphical construction for solving the characteristic equation (10.2-14). The left-
and right-hand sides are plotted as functions of X. The intersection points are the solutions. The
left-hand side (LHS) has multiple branches intersecting the abscissa at the roots of Jj+,(X). The
right-hand side (RHS) intersects each branch once and meets the abscissa at X = V. The number of
modes therefore equals the number of roots of Jj41(X) that are smaller than V. In this plot 1 = 0,
V = 10, and either the — or + signs in (10.2-14) may be used.

Each mode has a distinct radial distribution. As examples, the two radial distri-
butions u(r) illustrated in Fig. 10.2-2 correspond to the LPo; mode (J = 0, m =
1) in a fiber with V = 5, and the LP3, mode (J = 3, т = 4) in a fiber with
V = 25, respectively. Modes with / > 0 exist in pairs with azimuthal dependencies
given by exp(+jl@), in analogy with the Laguerre—Gaussian optical beam discussed
in Sec. 3.4. Since the (1, т) and (—1, т) modes have the same propagation con-
stants, the azimuthal behavior of the modes is revealed by examining the transverse
intensity distribution of their equal-weight superpositions, as is understood from the

402 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
commentary associated with Fig. 3.4-2. Specifically, the complex amplitude of the sum
is proportional to u(r) cosld ехр(—78т2); the intensity, which is proportional to
и? (г) cos* 1$, is illustrated in Fig. 10.2-4 for several ГР», modes.
LPO, Ри 0 -Р12 ili Poa да
Figure 10.2-4 Intensity distributions in the transverse plane for several LP;,,, modes for a step-
index fiber with fiber parameter У = 10. The white circles depict core—cladding boundaries. The
intensity distribution of the fundamental LP); mode resembles that of the Gaussian beam displayed
in Fig. 3.1-1. Each panel represents a superposition of a pair of modes with values of / that are
identical but opposite in sign. The intensity distributions are proportional to cos? J and thus display
21 azimuthal interference fringes.
Mode Cutoff
It is evident from the graphical construction in Fig. 10.2-3 that as V increases, the
number of intersections (modes) increases since the left-hand side of the characteristic
equation (10.2-14) is independent of V, whereas the right-hand side moves rightward
as V increases. Considering the minus signs in the characteristic equation, branches of
the left-hand side intersect the abscissa when Л_1(Х) = 0. These roots are denoted
Xim,m = 1,2,.... The number of modes Л is therefore equal to the number of roots
of J;_1(X) that are smaller than V. The (1, m) mode is allowed if V > xj. The mode
reaches its cutoff point when У = xj. As М decreases, the (1, т — 1) mode also
reaches its cutoff point whereupon a new root is reached, and so on. The smallest root
of Л_1(Х) is xo, = 0 for = 0 and the next smallest is х11 = 2.405 for [ = 1. The
numerical values of some of these roots are provided in Table 10.2-1.
Table 10.2-1 Cutoff V parameter for low-order LP, modes.”

1 т =1 2 3 4 5

0 0 3.832 7.016 10.174 13.324

1 2.405 5.520 8.654 11.792 14.931

2 3.832 7.016 10.174 13.324 16.471

3 5.136 8.417 11.620 14.796 17.960

4 6.380 9.761 13.015 16.224 19.409

5 7.588 11.065 14.373 17.616 20.218

6 8.772 12.339 15.700 18.980 22.218

“Те cutoffs of the 1 = 0 modes occur at the roots of J-1(X) = —J1(X). The 1 = 1 modes

are cut off at the roots of Jo(X), and so on.

When V < 2.405 all modes, with the exception of the fundamental LPo; mode,
are cut off. The fiber then operates as a single-mode waveguide. The condition for
single-mode operation is therefore

V < 2.405. (10.2-15)
Single-Mode Condition

10.2 GUIDEDWAVES 403
Since V is proportional to the optical frequency [see (10.2-10)], the cutoff condition for
the fundamental mode provided in (10.2-15) yields a corresponding cutoff frequency:
1 Co
Ve = с/т = — ——. (10.2-16)
МА 2.61а Cutoff Frequency
By comparison, in accordance with (9.2-9), the cutoff frequency of the lowest-order
mode in a dielectric slab waveguide of width d is и. = (1/NA)(c,/2d).
Number of Modes
A plot of the number of modes Му as a function of М therefore takes the form of a
staircase function that increases by unity at each of the roots x; of the Bessel function
Л—1(Х). A composite count of the total number of modes М (for all values of 1), аз
a function of V, is provided in Fig. 10.2-5. Each root must be counted twice since,
for each mode of azimuthal index [ > 0, there is a corresponding mode —! that
is identical except for opposite polarity of the angle ¢ (corresponding to rays with
helical trajectories of opposite senses), as can be seen by using the plus signs in the
characteristic equation. Moreover, each mode has two states of polarization and must
therefore be counted twice.
10 = 65550
9 Figure 10.2-5 Total number of
Ea Koso | | modes М versus fiber parameter V =
8 аа“ 2п(а/Л.)МА. Included in the count
_ |S] -7 poe || are two helical polarities for each
7 a jotcood mode with 1 > O as well as two
аа || polarizations рег mode. For У <
6 = |7 2.405, there is only a single mode,
V _ =, jo00d PF | | | the fundamental [Рот mode with two
5 5 р polarizations. For М = 4, modes LP,
и И and LP2; come into play, each with
4 hood two helicities, along with LP; and
=, ВИ LPo2 with zero helicities; accommo-
3 7 dating the two polarizations in each
сбоя И mode leads to a total of 12 modes. The
2, dotted curve is the relation М = $V?
A В ВВ set forth in (10.2-18), which provides
14 an approximate result for the number
0—5
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Number of modes М
Though there are no explicit exact formulas for the roots of Л(Х), for X > Р
we can write Л(Х) = (2/mX)'/? cos[X — (1+ $)%] in which case the roots are
approximately given by хи, = (1+ $)% + (2m—1)% = (1+ 2m — 4). This relation
may be used to estimate the number of modes for fibers with large V parameter and
consequently a large number of modes. When m is large the cutoff points of modes
(1, m), which are the roots of Jj41(X), are
Xim  1-+2т- 1+1 1= (1+2т)=, 1=0,1,...; m>1. (102-17)
For fixed [, these roots are uniformly spaced at a distance л, in which case the number
of roots M, satisfies 15 + ma = М, from which ЛМ = М/т — 1/2. Ми then decreases

404 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS

linearly with increasing [, beginning with М) = V/z for = 0 and ending at М; = 0
when | = Imax, Where Imax = 2М/л. Accommodating the two degrees of freedom
associated with positive and negative [ for | > 0, and the two polarizations for each
index (1, п»), leads to a total number of modes given by М = 2M) +4 me Му. With
the help of the relation У, Г = 5L(L + 1), we obtain the approximate expression
М = (4/n?)V?.

However, this expression underestimates the actual number of modes by virtue of
the fact that М includes lower-order modes for which the separation distances are less
than 7, as evinced in Table 10.2-1. As illustrated in Fig. 10.2-5, a good fit to the exact
number of modes is provided by the approximation

М = 5\°, (10.2-18)

Number of Modes (М > 1)

an expression that obtains in the quasi-plane-wave approach, as shown in Sec. 10.2C
[see (10.2-35)].

Based on (10.2-18), when V is large the approximate number of modes in the
circular waveguide is given by М = $V” = 2n(ma?/d2)(NA)?. This expression
is analogous to that for the number of modes in a square dielectric waveguide of
cross sectional area 42, in which case М = 2n(d*/A2)(NA)? when both TE and
TM polarizations are accommodated [see (9.3-3)].

EXAMPLE 10.2-1. Number of Modes. А silica-glass fiber with nj = 1.452 and A = 0.01
has a numerical aperture NA = \/n? — п2 © п. М2А = 0.205. ЕЛ, = 1.55 yum and the core radius
а = 20 um, then V = 2^(а/Л.)МА = 16.6. There are therefore approximately М = iV? А 138
modes. If the cladding is stripped away so that the core is in direct contact with air, ng = 1 and
NA = 1, whereupon V = 81.1 and approximately 3,286 modes are allowed.
Propagation Constants and Group Velocities
As indicated earlier, the propagation constants can be determined by solving the char-
acteristic equation (10.2-14) for the Xj, and using (10.2-4a) and (10.2-8) to obtain
Bim = (nik? — X7_,/a?)/?. Since У = 2n(a/A,)NA and NA = n,V2A, we have
Bim = mko(1 — 2A . Х?/М2)Н?. Because A < Тапа Xim < У, we use the
expansion (1 + 6)!/? = 1+ 46 for [6| < 1 to obtain
x2
Bim © nko h _ т А , (10.2-19)
у Propagation Constants
0<Xim < V
For fibers with large М, corresponding to a large number of modes, Xj, spans the range
0 < Xim < V so that Gin varies approximately between nik, and п1Ко(1 — A) =
nko, as predicted by ray optics.

To determine the group velocity of the (1, т) mode, vm = dw/dBim, we express
Pim as an explicit function of w by substituting nik, = w/c, and М = a(w/c,)NA into
(10.2-19), and then calculating (dj, /dw)~‘. Assuming that с! and A are independent
of w, and using the approximation (1 + 5)~! = 1 — 6 for [6| < 1, the group velocity
becomes

10.2 GUIDEDWAVES 405
2
Vim © C1 п _ Хы А , (10.2-20)
и Group Velocities
0< Xim < V
For V > 1, the group velocity varies approximately between c; and с1(1 — A) =
с1(п2/пл). In this case, the group velocities of the low-order modes are approximately
equal to the phase velocity of the core material, whereas those of the high-order modes
are smaller.

The fractional group-velocity change between the fastest and the slowest mode is
roughly equal to A, the fractional refractive index change of the fiber. Fibers with large
A, although endowed with a large NA and therefore large light-gathering capacity,
also have a large number of modes, large modal dispersion, and consequently high
pulse-spreading rates. These effects are particularly severe if the cladding is removed
altogether.

B. Single-Mode Fibers

As discussed earlier, a fiber with core radius a and numerical aperture NA operates
as a single-mode fiber in the fundamental LP9; mode if М = 2^(а/Ль)МА < 2.405.
Single-mode operation is therefore achieved via a small core diameter and small nu-
merical aperture (indicating that nz is close to пл), or by operating at a sufficiently low
optical frequency [below the cutoff frequency и. = (1/NA)(c,/2.61a)].

The fundamental LP; mode has a bell-shaped spatial distribution (Figs. 10.2-2 and
10.2-4 for | = 0) similar to that of the simple Gaussian beam (Fig. 3.1-1). It provides
the greatest confinement of light power within the core.

EXAMPLE 10.2-2. Single-Mode Operation. A silica-glass fiber with n, = 1.447 and A =
0.01 (NA = 0.205) operates at A, = 1.3 yum as a single-mode fiber if V = 27(a/\,)NA <
2.405, 1.е., if the core diameter 2a < 4.86 jum. If A is reduced to 0.0025, single-mode operation is
maintained for a diameter 2a < 9.72 jum.

«ПИ

The dependence of the effective refractive index n = В/Ко on the V parameter for
the fundamental mode is displayed in Fig. 10.2-6(a), and the corresponding dispersion
relation (и versus 0) is illustrated in Fig. 10.2-6(b). As the V parameter increases, i.e.,
as the frequency increases or the fiber diameter increases, the effective refractive index
n increases from 72 to пл. This is expected since the mode is more confined in the core
at shorter wavelengths.

п-т а :
Light line
W=O8
ИИ yo Ng ine
0 V 10 0 Bor

Figure 10.2-6 Schematic illustrations of the propagation characteristics of the fundamental LP 9;

mode. (a) Effective refractive index п = В/Ко as a function of the V parameter. (5) Dispersion

relation (w versus (1).

406 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS

There are numerous advantages of using single-mode fibers in optical fiber commu-
nication systems. As explained earlier, the modes of a multimode fiber travel at differ-
ent group velocities so that a short-duration pulse of multimode light suffers a range
of delays and therefore spreads in time. Quantitative measures of modal dispersion
are examined in Sec. 10.3B. In a single-mode fiber, on the other hand, there is only
one mode with a single group velocity, so that a short pulse of light arrives without
delay distortion. As explained in Sec. 10.3B, pulse spreading in single-mode fibers
does nevertheless result from other dispersive mechanisms, but these are significantly
smaller than modal dispersion.

Moreover, as shown in Sec. 10.3A, the rate of power attenuation is lower in a single-
mode fiber than in a multimode fiber. This, together with the smaller rate of pulse
spreading, permits substantially higher data rates to be transmitted over single-mode
fibers than over multimode fibers. This topic is addressed further in Chapters 23 and
25.

Another difficulty with the use of multimode fibers stems from the random interfer-
ence of the modes. As a result of uncontrollable imperfections, strains, and temperature
fluctuations, each mode undergoes a random phase shift so that the sum of the complex
amplitudes of the modes exhibits an intensity that is random in time and space. This
randomness is known as modal noise or speckle. This effect is similar to the fading of
radio signals resulting from multiple-path transmission. In a single-mode fiber there is
only one path and therefore no modal noise.

Polarization-Maintaining Fibers

In a fiber with circular cross section, each mode has two independent states of polar-
ization with the same propagation constant. Thus, the fundamental LP; mode in a
single-mode weakly guiding fiber may be polarized in the т or у direction; the two
orthogonal polarizations have the same propagation constant and the same group ve-
locity.

In principle, there should be no exchange of power between the two polarization
components. If the power of the light source is delivered exclusively into one polari-
zation, the power should remain in that polarization. In practice, however, slight ran-
dom imperfections and uncontrollable strains in the fiber result in random power trans-
fer between the two polarizations, as illustrated in Fig. 10.2-7.

Polarization
i,t kh ( ) @ tt,
= BD Polarization-maintaining fiber BD =
t t
Fe © «a,
(0) yy Vi
—— Dy Conventional fiber Dy ! : ;
Figure 10.2-7 (а) Ideal polarization-maintaining fiber. (6) Random transfer of power between two
polarizations in a conventional fiber.

Such coupling is facilitated because the two polarizations have the same propagation
constant and their phases are therefore matched. Thus, linearly polarized light at the
fiber input is generally transformed into elliptically polarized light at the fiber output.

10.2 GUIDED WAVES 407
In spite of the fact that the total optical power remains fixed (see Fig. 10.2-7), the ellip-
ticity of the received light fluctuates randomly with time as a result of fluctuations in
the material strain and temperature, and of the source wavelength. The randomization
of the power division between the two polarization components poses no difficulty if
the object is solely to transmit light power, provided that the total power is collected.

However, in many areas where fiber optics is used, e.g., in integrated-photonic
devices, optical sensors based on interferometric techniques, and coherent optical com-
munications, the fiber must transmit the complex amplitude (magnitude and phase) of a
specific polarization. Polarization-maintaining fibers are required for such applications.
To construct a polarization-maintaining fiber, the circular symmetry of the conventional
fiber must be abandoned, for example by using fibers with elliptical cross section or
stress-induced anisotropy of the refractive index. This eliminates the polarization de-
generacy, thereby making the propagation constants of the two polarizations different.
The introduction of such phase mismatch serves to reduce the coupling efficiency.

*C. Quasi-Plane Waves in Step-Index and Graded-Index Fibers
As shown in Sec. 10.1A, the modes of a step-index fiber are determined by writing
the Helmholtz equation (10.2-1) with n = n(r), solving for the spatial distributions of
the field components, and using Maxwell’s equations and the boundary conditions to
obtain the characteristic equation. However, carrying out this procedure for a graded-
index fiber is generally a difficult proposition.

In this section we rely instead on an approximate approach based on picturing the
field distribution as a quasi-plane wave traveling within the core, approximately along
the trajectory of an optical ray. A quasi-plane wave is a wave that is locally identical to
a plane wave, but slowly changes its direction and amplitude as it travels. This approach
permits us to maintain the simplicity of ray optics while at the same time retaining the
phase associated with the wave, so that the self-consistency condition for determining
the propagation constants of the guided modes can be used (as was done for the planar
dielectric waveguide in Sec. 9.2). This approximate technique, which makes use of the
WKB (Wentzel—Kramers—Brillouin) method, is applicable only for fibers with a large
number of modes (large V parameter). This approach also allows us to conveniently
compare the behavior of step-index and graded-index fibers.

Quasi-Plane Waves
Consider a solution of the Helmholtz equation (10.2-1) that takes the form of a quasi-
plane wave (see Sec. 2.3)

U(r) = a(r) exp [—jkS(r)] , (10.2-21)
where a(r) and S(r) are real functions of position that are slowly varying in compari-
son with the wavelength A, = 27/k,. It is known from (2.3-4) that 5 (г) approximately
satisfies the eikonal equation |V S|? = n?, and that the rays travel in the direction of the
gradient VS. If we take k,S(r) = kos (т) + 1é + Bz, where 5 (т) is a slowly varying
function of r, the eikonal equation yields

452, Е 2 2
(105) + В+ aT” (г) ke. (10.2-22)
The local spatial frequency of the wave in the radial direction is the partial derivative
of the phase k,S(r) with respect to г,
К, = ket, (10.2-23)
dr

408 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
so that (10.2-21) becomes
U(r) = a(r) exp (1 ] kp ir) ее 18 (10.2-24)
0 Quasi-Plane Wave
and (10.2-22) provides
К = n?(r) k? — 62 —P/r?, (10.2-25)

Defining ky = г so that ехр(-ЛФ) = exp(—jkgrd), and К. = В, (10.2-25)
yields КР Ка +k? = n?(r) Ко. The quasi-plane wave therefore has a local wavevector
К with magnitude n(r)k, and cylindrical-coordinate components (К,, kg, kz). Since
n(r) and kg are functions of r, К, is also generally position dependent. The direction
of k changes slowly with r (see Fig. 10.2-8), and follows a helical trajectory similar to
that of the skewed ray shown earlier in Fig. 10.1-6(6).

x ky. к
0 ke 5
ks
y
(а) (d)
Figure 10.2-8 (a) The wavevector К = (k,, kg, К.) in a cylindrical coordinate system. (5) Quasi-
plane wave following the direction of a ray.

To establish the region of the core within which the wave is bound, we determine
the values of r for which К, is real, ог k? > 0. For given values of [ and 8 we plot
К? = [n?(r) k? — [?/r? — B?] as a function of r. The term n?(r) k? is first plotted as
a function of r [thick solid curve in Fig. 10.2-9(a)]. The term 12 / r? is then subtracted,
yielding the dashed curve. The value of д? is marked by the thin solid vertical line.
It follows that k? is represented by the difference between the dashed curve and the
thin solid line, 1.е., by the shaded area. Regions where К? is positive and negative are
indicated by + and — signs, respectively.

For the step-index fiber, we have n(r) = пл for < a, and n(r) = ng for r > a.
In this case the quasi-plane wave is guided in the core by reflecting from the core—
cladding boundary at r = a. As illustrated in Fig. 10.2-9(а), the region of confinement
is then r; < r < a, where

nik? — 7 /r? — B? = 0. (10.2-26)
The wave bounces back and forth helically like the skewed ray illustrated in Fig. 10.1-
2. In the cladding (r > a), and near the center of the core (г < 11), К? is negative so
that К, is imaginary; the wave therefore decays exponentially in these regions. Note

10.2 GUIDEDWAVES 409
that r; depends оп В. For large В (or large 1), 7; is large so that the wave is confined to
a thin cylindrical shell near the boundary of the core.

For the graded-index fiber illustrated in Fig. 10.2-9(), К, is real in the region 71 <
r < В, where r; and В; are the roots of the equation
п? (т) k? — 2? /r? — 62 =0. (10.2-27)
It follows that the wave is essentially confined within a cylindrical shell of radii т! and
Вь just as for the helical ray trajectory shown in Fig. 10.1-6(6).
/|— пк) В/т? | -
Z {
а----^ а----
Г < rink PJP
`
+ К 1-----=-==
kp he 7.12
р n(nk,
ЕЯ пк
д 2
д ky
и
a - ПЕ---=-=
реа oa
0 0
mk, 9 nk, nak, BP nk,
(a) Step-index (b) Graded-index
Figure 10.2-9 Dependence of n?(r) k?, n?(r) k? — (1? /r?, and К? = n?(r) k? — [?/r? — 6? on
the position г. At any r, k? is the width of the shaded area with the + and — signs denoting positive
and negative values of k?, respectively. (a) Step-index fiber: k? is positive in the region 71 < г < a.
(b) Graded-index fiber: k? is positive in the region 71 < r < R).
Modes
The modes of the fiber are determined by imposing the self-consistency condition that
the wave reproduce itself after one helical period of travel between т; and В; and back.
The azimuthal pathlength corresponding to an angle 27 must correspond to a multiple
of 27 phase shift, 1.е., kg2ar = 2711; 1 = 0, 1, +2,.... This condition is evidently
satisfied since kg = [/г. Furthermore, since the component k, vanishes at r; and у,
the phase shift encountered in traveling between these turning points must be a multiple
of 7, much like the case of a standing wave between two mirrors. Thus,
Ri
] k, dr = пт, т, = 1,2,..., М (10.2-28)
м
where В; = а for the step-index fiber. This condition provides the characteristic
equation from which the propagation constants В», of the modes are determined. These
values are represented schematically in Fig. 10.2-10; the mode т = 1 has the largest
value of В (approximately по) whereas the mode т = М; has the smallest value
(approximately n2k,.). The WKB method, which is applicable for oscillatory solutions
between turning points, yields more accurate results: the quantities 1? and m above are
replaced by [2 + 1/4 and m + 1/4, corrections that are particularly important for small
values of [| and т.

410 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
r
ab | п?) ko — P/r?
SS
C2
ПО ОИ
0 0
0 ик 7 8?
Figure 10.2-10 The propagation constants and confinement regions of the fiber modes. Each curve
corresponds to an index [, which stretches from 0 to 6 in this plot. Each mode (corresponding to а
certain value of m) is schematically indicated by two dots connected by a dashed vertical line. The
ordinates of the dots denote the radii т; and В; of the cylindrical shell within which the mode is
confined. Values on the abscissa are the squared propagation constants of the modes, 87.
Number of Modes
The total number of modes can be determined by adding the number of modes Му for
[=0,1,... ‚ [вах. We approach this computation using a different procedure, however.
We first determine the number gg of modes with propagation constants greater than
a given value В. For each [, the number of modes М, (В) with propagation constant
greater than ( is the number of multiples of 27 the integral in (10.2-28) yields, 1.е.,
т [№ 1 fe
M,(8) = ] k, dr = ] мп? (г)? — Р/т? — В? dr, (10.2-29)
T Jp, T Jr,
where 7; and А; are the radii of confinement corresponding to the propagation constant
В, as provided in (10.2-27). Clearly, r; and А; depend on В, and Ву = a for the step-
index fiber.
The total number of modes with propagation constant greater than 2 is therefore
lnax (8)
qa =4У` M,(8), (10.2-30)
1=0
where [нах (В) is the maximum value of | that yields a bound mode with propagation
constants greater than 2, i.e., for which the peak value of the function п? (т) k? —
[?/r? is greater than 87. The grand-total mode count М is ав for В = nok. The
factor of 4 in (10.2-30) accommodates the two possible polarities of the angle ¢,
corresponding to positive and negative helical trajectories for each (1, т), and the two
possible polarizations. If the number of modes is sufficiently large, we can replace the
summation in (10.2-30) by an integration, whereupon
Imax (В)
ав = | МКВ) dl. (10.2-31)
0
For fibers with power-law refractive-index profiles, we insert (10.1-4) into (10.2-

10.2 GUIDED WAVES 411
29), and thence into (10.2-31). Evaluation of the integral then yields
L = (Ви) >
> N1Ko р
x M | —— 10.2-32
qs DA ( )
with
р pV?
M x — nik? aA = ——~ —, (10.2-33)
pt+2 p+2 2
where А = (п! — п2)/п1 and У = 27(a/X,)NA is the fiber V parameter. Since
4в = М at В = neko, М is indeed the total number of modes.
For step-index fibers (р —> со), (10.2-32) and (10.2-33) become
1— (8/niko)?
М | 10.2-34
Чв DA ( )
and
М = 5\°, (10.2-35)
Number of Modes
(Step-Index)
respectively. This expression for М is the same as that set forth in (10.2-18), which was
found to be a good fit to the exact number as a function of V, as shown in Fig. 10.2-5.
Propagation Constants
The propagation constant В, for mode 4 is obtained by inverting (10.2-32):
q \P/(p+2)

By & ть |1 —2 (4) A,  q=1,2,...,M, (10.2-36)
where the index gg has been replaced by а, and В has been replaced by Ву. Since
A < 1, the approximation УЛ + 6 = 1+ 46 (applicable for |5| < 1) can be applied
to (10.2-36), yielding

/(p+2)
By & miko c _ (+)° . А (10.2-37)
М Propagation Constants
The propagation constant Ву therefore decreases from А nik, (for 4 = 1) to nok, (for
q = М), as illustrated in Fig. 10.2-11. For the step-index fiber (р — oo), (10.2-36)
reduces to
By & nike (1 _ A) ; (10.2-38)
M Propagation Constants
(Step-Index Fiber)
which mimics the behavior of (10.2-19).

412 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
< SI

ins Step-index fiber > Graded-index fiber

Е Е

8 5

Е 5

5 5.

“ 0 Mode index 4 M * 0 Mode index 4 M
Figure 10.2-11 Dependence of the propagation constants Ву on the mode index а = 1,2,...,
for (a) a step-index fiber (р — со) and (5) an optimal graded-index fiber (р = 2).

Group Velocities
To determine the group velocity vg = dw/d{g, we write Ву as a function of w by
substituting (10.2-33) into (10.2-37), substituting njk, = w/c; into the result, and
evaluating vu, = (d3,/dw)~'. With the help of the approximation (1 +6)~' + 1—6
(valid for |6| < 1), and assuming that c, and A are independent of w (i.e., ignoring
material dispersion), we obtain
—2 p/(p+2)
Ug © C1 | pve () А (10.2-39)
p+2\M Group Velocities
For the step-index fiber (р — со), (10.2-39) yields
Ug X C1 (1 _ LA) . (10.2-40)
M
The group velocity thus varies from approximately с1 to с1(1 — A), as illustrated in
Fig. 10.2-12(a). The form of this equation harks back to (10.2-20).

$ >

> Step-index fiber > Graded-index fiber

ЕВ a” p=)

=. г fT а - 2/2)

6 А с -А) &

0 Mode index а M 0 Mode index а M

Figure 10.2-12 Group velocities v, of the modes of (a) a step-index fiber (р — со) and (6) an
optimal graded-index fiber (p = 2).
Optimal Index Profile
Equation (10.2-39) indicates that the grade profile parameter p = 2 yields a group
velocity vg = ст for all g, so that all modes travel at approximately the same velocity
ст. This highlights the advantage of the graded-index fiber for multimode transmission.

To determine the group velocity with better accuracy, we return to the derivation
of vg from (10.2-36) for p = 2. Carrying the Taylor-series expansion to three terms
instead of two, 1.е., /1 +6 + 1+ 56 — 502, gives rise to

10.2 GUIDED WAVES 413
2
Ug C1 (1 ft 5) (10.2-41)
M2 Group Velocities
(Graded-Index, p = 2)
Thus, the group velocities vary from approximately с1 at а = 1 to approximately
c1(1 — A*/2) at 4 = М. Comparison with the results for the step-index fiber is
provided in Fig. 10.2-12. The group-velocity difference for the parabolically graded
fiber is A?/2, which is substantially smaller than the group-velocity difference A for
the step-index fiber. Under ideal conditions, the graded-index fiber therefore reduces
the group-velocity difference by a factor A/2, thus realizing its intended purpose of
equalizing the modal velocities. However, since the analysis leading to (10.2-41) is
based on a number of approximations, this improvement factor is only a rough estimate
— indeed it is not fully attained in practice.
The number of modes М in a graded-index fiber with grade profile parameter р is
specified by (10.2-33). For p = 2, this becomes
Number of Modes
(Graded-Index, p = 2)
Comparing this with the result for the step-index fiber provided in (10.2-35), М =
р V?, reveals that the number of modes in an optimal graded-index fiber is roughly half
that in a step-index fiber with the same parameters пл, 72, and а.
D. Multicore Fibers and Fiber Couplers
Multicore Fibers
A multicore fiber (MCF) is a fiber with multiple cores embedded in a common
cladding (Fig. 10.2-13). The application in which such a fiber is to be used determines
the number of cores, the manner in which the cores are arranged, their diameters,
and their separations (pitch). Cores with small (large) diameter function as single-
mode (multimode) waveguides, respectively. Cores that are sufficiently well separated
exhibit minimal inter-core crosstalk and hence behave as independent waveguides.
MCFs find use in high-capacity optical networks, in inter-chip communications in
datacenters, and as sensors since they respond differentially to mechanical changes
(e.g., bending).
Figure 10.2-13 A multicore fiber (MCF) with
о о зеуеп согез.
Multicore Couplers
Optical fiber couplers are important components of optical fiber systems. Multicore
couplers are used to connect one or more fibers at the input of the device to one or more
fibers at its output. Several examples implementing various coupling configurations are
illustrated in Fig. 10.2-14 (additional examples are provided in Sec. 24.1B). It should
be pointed out, however, that other technologies are also useful for achieving coupling,
as discussed in Sec. 24.1A.
A key consideration in the design of an optical fiber coupler is the optical loss
that it introduces; the reduction of insertion loss is particularly challenging for single-
mode fibers. In certain applications, it is desired to render the distribution of optical

414 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
power at the output fibers of the coupler insensitive to particular wave properties, such
as wavelength or polarization. In other applications, the coupler may be deliberately
designed so that coupling is governed by one of these properties, such as different
wavelengths or polarizations being directed to different output fibers, as considered in
Sec. 24.1.
A = -
= > SCF
(b) С МСЕ МСЕ
Figure 10.2-14 Multicore fiber-optic couplers. (а) Dual-core fiber used as a splitter ог а combiner.
(b) Fan-out and fan-in couplers using a conical fused taper to connect a single-core fiber (SCF) to a
multicore fiber (MCF). (c) A 3-dB coupler using a dual-core fiber incorporating a biconical fused
taper. Adjacent fibers are weakly coupled, which allows light to gradually migrate from one fiber to
the other, much as in the integrated-photonic coupler displayed in Fig. 9.4-7(6).
Photonic Lantern
A photonic lantern is a fiber-optic coupler that connects a single multimode fiber
(MMF) to multiple single-mode fibers (SMFs). As illustrated in Fig. 10.2-15, working
our way from right to left, a collection of SMFs are fused into a single glass body,
thereby forming a multicore fiber (MCF). This body in turn is tapered in cross section
and connected to a single-core MMF at the narrow end of the taper. The device is
reciprocal and can be used in either a fan-out or a fan-in configuration.
MCF a Figure 10.2-15 А photonic lantern provides
MME eA an interface between the modes of one multi-
Е М mode fiber (MMF) and many single-mode fibers
С Е АААИИ (SMFs). It can be operated in a fan-out configura-
= = tion, in which light travels from left to right, or in
Taper XS a fan-in configuration, in which light travels from
SS right to left.

When operated in a fan-out configuration, incoming light excites the modes of the
MMF, and each mode in turn excites several, or all, of the multiple cores in the tapered
region. Within the narrow portion of the tapered region, the cores are weakly coupled
and thus behave as an array of coupled single-mode waveguides, wherein the light in
one waveguide can migrate into neighboring waveguides (see Sec. 9.4C). In the wider
portion of the tapered region, the cores are sufficiently separated so that they form a
MCF comprising independent single-mode waveguides that serve to feed the outgoing
SMEFs.

While this structure may be used as a simple fan-out coupler that distributes the
power entering the MMF among the outgoing SMFs, much like the fan-out configura-
tion depicted in Fig. 10.2-14(), it has additional capabilities. Ideally, each of the MMF
modes would couple to one, and only one, of the SMFs, whereupon the device would
serve as a demultiplexer separating the information carried by each of the incoming
modes into distinct SMF channels (or, in the case of the reciprocal fan-in configuration,
as a multiplexer). Unfortunately, however, at the entrance to the taper, and throughout
its narrow region where the constituent fibers are not well separated, each of the MMF
modes couples to more than one of the SMFs, thereby obviating such a one-to-one
correspondence.

10.3 ATTENUATION AND DISPERSION 415

Nevertheless, the resultant mixing of information can be undone using computa-
tional methods. The relation between the complex amplitudes of the output waves in
the SMFs and those of the modes in the input MMF is mathematically represented
by a matrix with appropriate weights for such a linear superposition. This matrix is
established by the geometry of the taper and the transmission through the array of
coupled waveguides, as described in Sec. 9.4C for waveguide arrays. If this matrix is
able to be determined, then matrix inversion can be used to computationally extract the
information carried by the MMF modes from the complex amplitudes of the outgoing
light in the SMFs.

Photonic lanterns find use in optical fiber communication systems in which MMF
modes serve as individual communication channels (spatial-mode multiplexing is con-
sidered in Sec. 25.3B). Fan-out lanterns may also be used to distribute light carried
by one MMF to several SMFs for processing by optical components designed for
single-mode operation, such as single-mode fiber Bragg grating (FBG) spectral filters
or optical amplifiers, before being recombined and directed to another MMF via a fan-
in lantern. An example of the use of a photonic lantern in astronomical instrumentation
relies on directing the multimode light delivered by a telescope to a set of single-mode
fiber filters for spectral filtering.

10.3 ATTENUATION AND DISPERSION
Attenuation and dispersion limit the performance of the optical-fiber medium as a data-
transmission channel. Attenuation, associated with losses of various kinds, limits the
magnitude of the optical power transmitted. Dispersion, which is responsible for the
temporal spread of optical pulses, limits the rate at which data-carrying pulses may be
transmitted.
A. Attenuation
Attenuation Coefficient
The power of a light beam traveling through an optical fiber decreases exponentially
with distance as a result of absorption and scattering. The associated attenuation
coefficient is conventionally defined in units of decibels per kilometer (dB/km) and
is denoted by the symbol сх, 7 1
a= FT 1010510 т’ (10.3-1)
where J = P(L)/P(0) is the power transmission ratio (the ratio of transmitted to
incident power) for a fiber of length Г, km. The conversion of a ratio to dB units is
illustrated in Fig. 10.3-1. An attenuation of 3 dB/km, for example, corresponds to a
power transmission of J = 0.5 through a fiber of length Ё = 1 km.
YN
| Nop
Ne ee
a Ne Figure 10.3-1 The dB value of a ratio. For
dB ААА example, 3 dB is equivalent to a ratio of 0.5; 10 dB

3 NOCH corresponds to J = 0.1; and 20 dB corresponds to

АЕ T= 001

РГ

ИВ

0.1 Ratio 05

416 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
For light traveling through a cascade of lossy systems, the overall transmission
ratio is the product of the constituent transmission ratios. By virtue of the logarithmic
relation in (10.3-1), the overall loss in dB thus becomes the sum of the constituent dB
losses. For a propagation distance of z km, the loss is xz dB. The associated power
transmission ratio, which is obtained by inverting (10.3-1), is then
P(z)/P(0) = 10-“2/10 == e703 0%, x in dB/km. (10.3-2)
Equation (10.3-2) applies when the quantity сх is specified in units of dB/km. If,
instead, the attenuation coefficient a is specified in units of Кт- 1, we have
P(z)/P(0) =e", ainkm!, (10.3-3)
where a = 0.23 хх. For components other than optical fibers, the attenuation coefficient
a is usually specified in units of cm~! in which case the power attenuation is described
by (10.3-3) with z specified in cm.
Absorption
The attenuation coefficient сх of fused silica (53102) is strongly dependent on wave-
length, as illustrated in Fig. 10.3-2. This material has two strong absorption bands: a
mid-infrared absorption band resulting from vibrational transitions and an ultraviolet
absorption band arising from electronic and molecular transitions. The tails of these
bands form a window in the near infrared region of the spectrum in which there is little
intrinsic absorption.
Х
^^ `®
Е 3 Rayleigh 7
= » scattering Infrared
3 2 xa absorption —
3 > /
Pr /
5 1
3 OH
я absorption
8 0.5 . enn
я
= 0.3 \ UV absorption <
5 band tail > /
502 ^^ ^^. < {
< aN ~~z_/
ts вт
0.1 =
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 14 1.6 1.8
Wavelength A, (рта)
Figure 10.3-2 Attenuation coefficient « of silica glass versus free-space wavelength \,. There
is a local minimum at 1.3 wm (х = 0.3 dB/km) and an absolute minimum at 1.55 wm (a =
0.15 dB/km).
Scattering
Rayleigh scattering is another intrinsic effect that contributes to the attenuation of
light in glass. The random localized variations of the molecular positions in the glass
itself create random inhomogeneities in the refractive index that act as tiny scattering
centers. The amplitude of the scattered field is proportional to w?, where w is the
angular frequency of the light.’ As discussed in Sec. 5.6B, the scattered intensity is
* The scattering medium creates a polarization density P, which corresponds to a source of radiation
proportional to dP/dt? = —w?P; see (5.2-25).

10.3 ATTENUATION AND DISPERSION 417
therefore proportional to w*, or to 1/4, so that short wavelengths are scattered more
than long wavelengths. Light in the visible region of the spectrum is therefore scattered
more than light in the infrared.

The functional form of Rayleigh scattering, which decreases with wavelength as
1/A4, is known as the Rayleigh inverse fourth-power law. In the visible region
of the spectrum, Rayleigh scattering is a more significant source of loss than is the
tail of the ultraviolet absorption band, as shown in Fig. 10.3-2. However, Rayleigh
loss becomes negligible in comparison with infrared absorption in silica glass for
wavelengths greater than = 1.6 wm.

We conclude that the transparent window in silica glass is bounded by Rayleigh scat-
tering on the short-wavelength side and by infrared absorption on the long-wavelength
side (indicated by the dashed curves in Fig. 10.3-2). Near-infrared communication
systems using silica-glass fibers are deliberately designed to operate in this window.
Extrinsic Effects
Aside from these intrinsic effects there are extrinsic absorption bands that result from
the presence of impurities in silica glass, principally metallic ions (e.g., Fe, Cu, Cr, and
Ni) and OH radicals associated with water vapor dissolved in the glass. Most metal
impurities can be readily removed. Initially, OH impurities proved to be more difficult
to eliminate but methods were ultimately developed to do so. Wavelengths at which
glass fibers are used for optical fiber communications were traditionally selected to
avoid the OH absorption bands.

Light-scattering losses may also be accentuated when dopants are added, as they
often are for purposes of index grading. The attenuation coefficient for guided light in
glass fibers depends on the absorption and scattering in the core and cladding materials.
Each mode has a different penetration depth into the cladding, causing the rays to travel
different effective distances and rendering the attenuation coefficient mode-dependent.
It is generally higher for higher-order modes. Single-mode fibers therefore typically
have smaller attenuation coefficients than multimode fibers (Fig. 10.3-3). Losses are
also introduced by small random variations in the geometry of the fiber and by bends.

\ | | | |
Е №
Е 3 > /
a \ MMF /
Zz 2 `` /
N /
5 NS /
51 SS
80.5 `5 I NG
Е —
503 SMF д /'
B 0.2 Supressed “SS /
< OH absorption SN /
0.1 it~
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 14 1.6 1.8
Wavelength Л» (um)
Figure 10.3-3 Ranges of attenuation coefficients for silica-glass single-mode fibers (SMF) and
multimode fibers (MMF).

418 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS

B. Dispersion

When a short pulse of light travels through an optical fiber, its power is “dispersed”
in time so that the pulse spreads into a wider time interval. There are five principal
sources of dispersion in optical fibers:

= Modal dispersion

= Material dispersion

= Waveguide dispersion

= Polarization mode dispersion

= Nonlinear dispersion
The combined contributions of these effects to the spread of pulses in time are not
necessarily additive, as will be understood in the sequel.

Modal Dispersion
Modal dispersion occurs in multimode fibers as a result of the differences in the group
velocities of the various modes. A single impulse of light entering an М-тоа4е fiber
at z = 0 disperses into М pulses whose differential delay increases as a function of
z. For a fiber of length Г, the time delays engendered by the different velocities are
та = L/vq, q = 1,...,.M, where v, is the group velocity of mode 4. If Umin and Umax
are the smallest and largest group velocities, respectively, the received pulse spreads
over a time interval L/Umin — L/Umax. Since the modes are usually not excited equally,
the overall shape of the received pulse generally has a smooth envelope, as illustrated in
Fig. 10.3-4. An estimate of the overall pulse duration (assuming a triangular envelope
and using the FWHM definition of the width) is 0, = $(L/ Umin — L/Umax), Which
represents the modal-dispersion response time of the fiber.
| бт / |
0 t 0 : t 0 - - t
SSS SS 5959559959555
— <
Figure 10.3-4 Pulse spreading caused by modal dispersion.

In a step-index fiber with a large number of modes, уши А C1(1—A) and Umax © C1
[see Sec. 10.2C and Fig. 10.2-12(a)]. Since (I—A)~! = 1+A for A < 1, the response
time turns out to be a fraction A/2 of the delay time L/c;:

LA
oO, —-—. (10.3-4)
a 2 Response Time
(Multimode Step-Index)

Modal dispersion is far smaller in graded-index (GRIN) fibers than in step-index
fibers since the group velocities are equalized and the differences between the delay
times of the modes, то = L/vq are reduced. It was shown in Sec. 10.2C and in
Fig. 10.2-12(b) that a graded-index fiber with an optimal index profile and a large
number of modes has Umax 2 с1 and Umin & €1(1 — A?/2). The response time in this
case is therefore a factor of A/2 smaller than that in a step-index fiber:

Г А?
Oo, +. (10.3-5)
a 4 Response Time
(Graded-Index)

10.3 ATTENUATION AND DISPERSION 419
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 10.3-1. Multimode Pulse Broadening Rate. In a step-index fiber with A =
0.01 and n = 1.46, pulses spread at a rate of approximately o,/L = A/2c, = п: А/2с =
24 ns/km. In a 100-km fiber, therefore, an impulse spreads to a width of = 2.4 ys. If the same
fiber is optimally index-graded, the pulse broadening rate is approximately n, A?/4c, = 122 ps/km,
a substantial reduction.
«ПИ

The pulse broadening arising from modal dispersion is proportional to the fiber
length Г, ш both step-index and GRIN fibers. Because of mode coupling, however,
this dependence does not necessarily apply for fibers longer than a certain critical
length. Coupling occurs among modes that have approximately the same propagation
constants as a result of small imperfections in the fiber, such as random irregularities
at its surface or inhomogeneities in its refractive index. This permits optical power to
be exchanged between the modes. Under certain conditions, the response time о; of
mode-coupled fibers is proportional to Г, for small fiber lengths and to УГ when a
critical length is exceeded, whereupon the pulses are broadened at a reduced rate."
Material Dispersion
Glass is a dispersive medium, 1.е., its refractive index is a function of wavelength.
As discussed in Sec. 5.7, an optical pulse travels in a dispersive medium of refractive
index n with a group velocity о = c,/N, where N = п — ло ап/АаЛо. Since the
pulse is a wavepacket comprising a collection of components of different wavelengths,
each traveling at a different group velocity, its width spreads. The temporal duration
of an optical impulse of spectral width ох (nm), after traveling a distance Г, through a
dispersive material, is 0, = |(d/dX,)(L/v)|o, = |(d/dA,)(LN/c.)|oy. This leads to
a response time [see (5.7-2), (5.7-7), and (5.7-8)]

вт =|Dy\oyL, (10.3-6)
Response Time
(Material Dispersion)
where the material dispersion coefficient D) is
Ло ап
D) с. 4% (10.3-7)
The response time increases linearly with the distance Г. Usually, Г, is measured in
km, о. in ps, and ол in nm, so that D) has units of ps/km-nm. This type of dispersion
is called material dispersion.

The wavelength dependence of the dispersion coefficient Г)» for a silica-glass fiber
is displayed in Fig. 10.3-5. At wavelengths shorter than 1.3 дла the dispersion co-
efficient is negative, so that wavepackets of long wavelength travel faster than those
of short wavelength. At a wavelength A, = 0.87 ит, for example, the dispersion
coefficient Г)» is approximately —80 ps/km-nm. At Ло = 1.55 jum, on the other hand,
Dy = +17 ps/km-nm. At A, = 1.312 wm the dispersion coefficient vanishes, so that
a, in (10.3-6) vanishes. A more precise expression for о’ that incorporates the spread
of the spectral width ох about A, = 1.312 ила yields a very small, but nonzero, width.

1 See, e.g., J. Е. Midwinter, Optical Fibers for Transmission, Wiley, 1979; Krieger, reissued 1992.

420 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS

& о Normal dispersion | Anomalous

Ра | й , i . . dispersion

В -40

5 В | | | | |

Yo | | | | i i | | |

| Jo

2’ -200

06 07 08 09 1 11 12 13 14 15 16
Wavelength Ло (ит)
Figure 10.3-5 Observed dispersion coefficient D, for silica-glass fiber аз а function of the
wavelength Ло. The result differs slightly from that calculated for bulk fused silica (see Fig. 5.7-5).
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 10.3-2. Pulse Broadening Associated with Material Dispersion. The dis-
persion coefficient О» for a silica-glass fiber is approximately —80 ps/km-nm at A, = 0.87 yum.
For a source of spectral linewidth ох = 50 nm (generated by an LED, for example) the pulse-
spread rate in a single-mode fiber with no other sources of dispersion is |D,|o, = 4 ns/km. An
impulse of light traveling a distance Г = 100 km in the fiber is therefore broadened to a width
д: = |Dy|o,L = 0.4 ps. The response time of the fiber is thus о, = 0.4 us. As another example,
an impulse with narrower spectral linewidth ох = 2 nm (generated by a laser diode, for example),
operating near 1.3 дла where the dispersion coefficient is 1 ps/km-nm, spreads at а rate of only
2 ps/km. In this case, therefore, a 100-km fiber has a substantially shorter response time, 0, = 0.2 ns.
«ПИ
Combined Material and Modal Dispersion
The effect of material dispersion on pulse broadening in multimode fibers may be
determined by returning to the original equations for the propagation constants Ву
of the modes and determining the group velocities vu, = (d8,/dw)~! with пл and
ng provided as functions of w. Consider, for example, the propagation constants of a
graded-index fiber with a large number of modes, which are given by (10.2-37) and
(10.2-33). Although п1 and п2 are dependent on w, it is reasonable to assume that the
ratio A = (пл — nz) /пл is approximately independent of w. Using this approximation
and evaluating vy = (d8,/dw)~', we obtain
_ © р- 2 га \2/Ф+2)

я | (М) al. (10.3-8)
where N; = (d/dw)(wn1) = n1—A.(dn1/dA,) is the group index of the core material.
Under this approximation, the earlier expression (10.2-39) for v, remains intact, except
that the refractive index n, is replaced with the group index №. For a step-index fiber
(р — ov), the group velocities of the modes vary from c,/Nj to (co/Ni)(1 — A), so
that the response time is

о; ^ Ро . А . (10.3-9)
(Co/Ni) 2 Response Time
(Multimode Step-Index,

Material Dispersion)

10.3 ATTENUATION AND DISPERSION 421
This expression should be compared with (10.3-4), which is applicable in the absence
of material dispersion.
ee
EXERCISE 10.3-1
Optimal Grade Profile Parameter. Use (10.2-37) and (10.2-33) to derive the following expres-
sion for the group velocity v, when both п! and A are wavelength dependent:
_ Со р-2-р. / а \P/(Pt2) _

ей (1) al. q=1,2,...,M (10.3-10)
with р, = 2(n1/N,)(w/A) dA/dw. What is the optimal value of the grade profile parameter р for
minimizing modal dispersion?
ee
Waveguide Dispersion
The group velocities of the modes in a waveguide are dependent on the wavelength
even if material dispersion is negligible. This dependence, known as waveguide dis-
persion, results from the dependence of the field distribution in the fiber on the ratio
of the core radius to the wavelength (а/Ло). The relative portions of optical power
in the core and cladding thus depend on Ло. Since the phase velocities in the core
and cladding differ, the group velocity of the mode is altered. Waveguide dispersion
is particularly important in single-mode fibers where modal dispersion is not present,
and at wavelengths for which material dispersion is small (near Ао = 1.3 wm in silica
glass), since it then dominates.

As discussed in Sec. 10.2A, the group velocity v = (d@/dw)~! and the propagation
constant В are determined from the characteristic equation, which is governed by the
fiber V parameter, V = 27(a/A,)NA = (а: NA/c,)w. In the absence of material
dispersion (1.е., when NA is independent of w), М is directly proportional to w, so that

1 dB dBdV_ а. МАаВ
м 10.3-11
v dw dV dw Co dV ( )
The pulse broadening associated with a source of spectral width o is related to the
time delay L/v Бу 0, = |(d/dA.)(L/v)|oy. Thus,
от = |DyloyL, (10.3-12)
where the waveguide dispersion coefficient ПД», is given Бу
а [1 wd [1
Dy = —|-})=-~——([-}. 10.3-13
dXo (;) Ло dw (<) ( )
Substituting (10.3-11) into (10.3-13) leads to
р — 1 \ 28 (10.3-14)
г Wo dV?" ,

Thus, the group velocity is inversely proportional to dG/dV and the waveguide
dispersion coefficient is proportional to V*d?/dV*. The dependence of В оп V is
displayed in Fig. 10.2-6(a) for the fundamental Рот mode. Since В varies nonlinearly

422 — СНАРТЕВ 10 FIBER OPTICS

with V, the waveguide dispersion coefficient D,, is itself a function of V and is
therefore also a function of the wavelength.’ The dependence of D,, оп Ло may be
controlled by altering the radius of the core or, for graded-index fibers, the index
grading profile.

Combined Material and Waveguide Dispersion (Chromatic Dispersion)
The combined effects of material dispersion and waveguide dispersion (which we refer
to as chromatic dispersion) may be determined by including the wavelength depen-
dence of the refractive indices, пл and nz and therefore NA, when determining d3/dw
from the characteristic equation. Although generally smaller than material dispersion,
waveguide dispersion does shift the wavelength at which the total chromatic dispersion
is minimum.

Since chromatic dispersion limits the performance of single-mode fibers, more ad-
vanced fiber designs aim at reducing this effect by using graded-index cores with
refractive-index profiles selected such that the wavelength at which waveguide dis-
persion compensates material dispersion is shifted to the wavelength at which the fiber
is to be used (Fig. 10.3-6).

И о
(a) DSF Я 8 ЗЕ Е (nm)
: ЕЕ As |v
(b) ЕЕ / И S$ $ 3 & лат
_ 0
a8 —_
(©) DCF — 8 8 № (т)
Figure 10.3-6 Refractive-index profiles with schematic wavelength dependences of the silica-
glass material dispersion coefficient (dashed curves) and the combined material and waveguide
dispersion coefficients (solid curves) for (a) dispersion-shifted fiber (DSF); (6) dispersion-flattened
fiber (DFF); and (c) dispersion-compensating fiber (DCF).

Dispersion-shifted fibers have been successfully fabricated by using a linearly
tapered core refractive index and a reduced core radius, as illustrated in Fig. 10.3-
6(a). This technique can be used to shift the zero-chromatic-dispersion wavelength

1 For further details on this topic, see the reading list, particularly the seminal articles by D. Gloge.

10.3 ATTENUATION AND DISPERSION 423
from 1.3 им to 1.55 ила, where silica-glass fiber has its lowest attenuation. Other
grading profiles have been developed for which the chromatic dispersion vanishes
at two wavelengths and is reduced for intermediate wavelengths. These fibers, called
dispersion-flattened, have been implemented by using a quadruple-clad layered grad-
ing, as illustrated in Fig. 10.3-6(6). Note, however, that the process of index grading
itself introduces losses since dopants are used.

Fibers with other refractive index profiles may be engineered such that the combined
material and waveguide dispersion coefficient is proportional to that of a conventional
step-index fiber but has the opposite sign. This can be achieved over an extended
wavelength band, as illustrated in Fig. 10.3-6(c). The pulse spread introduced by a
conventional fiber can then be reversed by concatenating the two types of fiber. A
fiber with a reversed dispersion coefficient is known as a dispersion-compensating
fiber (DCF). A short segment of the DCF may be used to compensate the dispersion
introduced by a long segment of conventional fiber.

Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD)

As indicated earlier, the fundamental spatial mode (LP 1) of an optical fiber has two
polarization modes, say linearly polarized in the x and y directions. If the fiber has
perfect circular symmetry about its axis, and its material is perfectly isotropic, then the
two polarization modes are degenerate, i.e., they travel with the same velocity. How-
ever, fibers exposed to real environmental conditions exhibit a small birefringence that
varies randomly along their length. This is caused by slight variations in the refractive
indices and fiber cross-section ellipticity. Although the effects of such inhomogeneities
and anisotropies on the polarization modes, and on the dispersion of optical pulses, are
generally difficult to assess, we consider these effects in terms of simple models.

Consider first a fiber modeled as a homogeneous anisotropic medium with principal
axes in the x and у directions and principal refractive indices п and ny. The third
principal axis lies along the fiber axis (the z direction). The fiber material is assumed
to be dispersive so that nz and n, are frequency dependent, but the principal axes are
taken to be frequency independent within the spectral band of interest. If the input
pulse is linearly polarized in the x direction, over a length of fiber L it will undergo а
group delay 7, = N,L/c,; if it is linearly polarized in the у direction, the group delay
will be т, = NyL/co. Here, №, and №, are the group indices associated with п, and
Ny (see Sec. 5.7). A pulse in a polarization state that includes both linear polarizations
will undergo a differential group delay (DGD) 67 = |r, — 7,| given by

дт = ANL/c, (10.3-15)
Differential Group Delay
where AN = |N, — N,|. Upon propagation, therefore, the pulse will split into two
orthogonally polarized components whose centers will separate in time as the pulses
travel (see Fig. 10.3-7). The DGD corresponds to polarization mode dispersion
(PMD) that increases linearly with the fiber length at the rate AN/c,, which is usually

expressed in units of ps/km.
I "7 Figure 10.3-7 Differential group delay (DGD)
associated with polarization mode dispersion

- (PMD).
0 t 0 TxTy т
ния

424 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS

Since a long fiber is typically exposed to environmental and structural factors that
vary along its axis, the simple model considered above is often inadequate, however.
Under these conditions, a more realistic model comprises a sequence of short homo-
geneous fiber segments, each with its own principal axes and principal indices. The
principal axes are taken to be slightly misaligned (rotated) from one segment to the
next. Such a cascaded system is generally described by a 2 x 2 Jones matrix T, which
is a product of the Jones matrices of the individual segments (see Sec. 6.1B). The
polarization modes of the combined system are the eigenvectors of T and are not
necessarily linearly polarized modes. If the fiber is taken to be lossless, the matrix
T is unitary. Its eigenvalues are then phase factors ехр(7ф1) and exp(jy2), which
may be written in the form exp(jnik,L) and exp(jnak L), where пл and ng are the
effective refractive indices of the two polarization modes and L is the fiber length.
The propagation of light through such a length of fiber may then be determined by
analyzing the input wave into components along the two polarization modes; these
components travel with effective refractive indices п and no.

Since the fiber is dispersive, T is frequency dependent and so too are the indices пл
and nz of the modes, as well as their corresponding group indices N; and №. An input
pulse with a polarization state that is the same as that of the fiber’s first polarization
mode travels with an effective group index №1. Similarly, if the pulse is in the second
polarization mode, it travels with an effective group index №. However, an input pulse
with a component in each of the fiber’s polarization modes suffers DGD, as provided
in (10.3-15), with АМ = [№1 — №.

A Statistical model describing the random variations in the magnitude and orienta-
tion of birefringence along the length of the fiber leads to an expression of the RMS
value of the pulse broadening associated with DGD. This turns out to be proportional
to VL instead of L,

Polarization Mode Dispersion
where Пьмь is a dispersion parameter typically ranging from 0.1 to 1 ps/ Vkm.

Aside from DGD, higher-order dispersion effects are also present. Each of the
polarization modes is spread by group velocity dispersion (GVD) with dispersion
coefficients proportional to the second derivative of its refractive index (see Sec. 5.7).

Another higher-order effect relates to the coupled nature of the spectral and polar-
ization properties of the system. Since the matrix T is frequency dependent, not only
are the eigenvalues (i.e., the principal indices п: and nz) frequency dependent, but
so too are the eigenvectors (i.e., the polarization modes). If the pulse spectral width
is sufficiently narrow (i.e., the pulse is not too short), we may approximately use the
polarization modes at the central frequency. For ultrashort pulses, however, a more
detailed analysis that includes a combined polarization and spectral description of the
system is required. Polarization states may be found such that the group delays are
frequency insensitive so that their associated GVD is minimal. However, these are not
eigenvectors of the Jones matrix so that the input and output polarization states are not
the same."

* For further details on this topic, see C. D. Poole and R. E. Wagner, Phenomenological Approach to
Polarization Dispersion in Long Single-Mode Fibers, Electronics Letters, vol. 22, pp. 1029-1030, 1986.

10.3 ATTENUATION AND DISPERSION 425
ee
EXERCISE 10.3-2
Differential Group Delay т a Two-Segment Fiber. Consider the propagation of an optical
pulse through a fiber of length 1 km comprising two segments of equal length. Each segment is
a single-mode anisotropic fiber with principal group indices N, = 1.462 and N, = 1.463. The
corresponding group velocity dispersion coefficients are О, = Dy = 20 ps/km-nm. The principal
axes of one segment are at an angle of 45° with respect to the other, as illustrated in Fig. 10.3-8.

(a) If the input pulse has a width of 100 ps and is linearly polarized at 45° with respect to the fiber
x and у directions, sketch the temporal profile of the pulse at the output end of the fiber. Assume
that the pulse source has a spectral linewidth of 50 nm.

(b) Determine the polarization modes of the full fiber and determine the temporal profile of the output
pulse if the input pulse is in one of the polarization modes.

НЫ

Figure 10.3-8 Two-segment birefringent fiber.
ee

Nonlinear Dispersion

Yet another dispersion effect occurs when the intensity of light in the core of the

fiber is sufficiently high, since the refractive index then becomes intensity dependent

and the material exhibits nonlinear behavior. Since the phase is proportional to the
refractive index, the high-intensity portions of an optical pulse undergo phase shifts
different from the low-intensity portions, resulting in instantaneous frequencies shifted
by different amounts. This nonlinear effect, called self-phase modulation (SPM),
contributes to pulse dispersion. Under certain conditions, SPM can compensate the
group velocity dispersion (GVD) associated with material dispersion, and the pulse

can travel without altering its temporal profile. Such a guided wave is known as a

soliton. Nonlinear optics is introduced in Chapter 22 and optical solitons are discussed

in Chapter 23.

Summary

The propagation of pulses in optical fibers is governed by attenuation and several

types of dispersion. Figure 10.3-9 provides a schematic illustration in which the

profiles of pulses traveling through different types of fibers are compared.

= Ina multimode fiber (MMF), modal dispersion dominates the width of the pulse
received at the terminus of the fiber. It is governed by the disparity in the group
delays of the individual modes.

= Ina single-mode fiber (SMF), there is no modal dispersion and the transmission
of optical pulses is limited by combined material and waveguide dispersion
(called chromatic dispersion). The width of the output pulse is governed by
group velocity dispersion (GVD).

= Material dispersion is usually much stronger than waveguide dispersion. How-
ever, at wavelengths where material dispersion is small, waveguide dispersion
becomes important. Fibers with special index profiles may then be used to
alter the chromatic-dispersion characteristics, creating dispersion-flattened,
dispersion-shifted, and dispersion-compensating fibers.

426 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
= Pulse propagation in long single-mode fibers for which chromatic dispersion
is negligible is dominated by polarization mode dispersion (PMD). Small
anisotropic changes in the fiber, caused, for example, by environmental con-
ditions, alter the polarization modes so that the input pulse travels in two
polarization modes with different group indices. This differential group delay
(DGD) results in a small pulse spread.
= Under certain conditions an intense pulse, called an optical soliton, can render
a fiber nonlinear and travel through it without broadening. This results from
a balance between material dispersion and self-phase modulation (the depen-
dence of the refractive index on the light intensity), as discussed in Chapter 23.
—.' 7 _ б
(а) ‘ LT
у ' ММЕ 0 Trin Tmax |
(b) ( ( ) ) Ty or
|
0 t SME 0 t
— <— OT
© _©_ _ i.
0 t SMF with PMD 0 t
Soliton
+|<— п ( ( ) ) —|=- д
9 t Nonlinear SMF 0
Figure 10.3-9 Broadening of a short optical pulse after transmission through different types
of optical fibers. (a) Modal dispersion in a multimode fiber (MMF). (6) Material and waveguide
dispersion (chromatic dispersion) in a single-mode fiber (SMF). (c) Polarization mode dispersion
(PMD) in a SMF. (d) Soliton transmission in a nonlinear SMF.
10.4 HOLEY AND PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL FIBERS
A holey fiber is a fiber that contains multiple cylindrical air holes parallel to, and
along the length of, its axis. Usually fabricated from pure silica glass, its holes are
organized in a regular periodic pattern. As illustrated in Fig. 10.4-1, the core of the
fiber is defined by a defect, or fault, in the periodic structure, such as a missing hole,
a hole of a different size, or an extra hole. The holes are characterized by the spacing
between their centers A, and their diameters d. The quantity A, which is also called the
pitch, is typically in the range 1-10 jum. It is not necessary to include dopants in the
glass. Holey fibers guide optical waves via one of two mechanisms: effective-index
guidance or photonic-bandgap guidance, which we consider in turn below.

10.4 HOLEY AND PHOTONIC-CRYSTAL FIBERS 427
do ‘a
ее... ОООО0000 OOOO
poooo000c0 QOOQOOO00 ОО ТОО ТОО
В ООБОО0О0О00 СООО О
В ООО0О0бО0О000 ОООООО
tenes тень ООООСООО0 ОТООЗОО О
и ОООбО0О000 ООО ТОО
бо OUD OOUIUG QOOOQOO000 ООО ООО
see e esac ees OOOOOOOO ООО ОО
ODIO DIC oor ОООО000 COOL OO
BOG OOOO OO
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 10.4-1 Various forms of holey fibers. (a) Solid core (dotted circle) surrounded by a
cladding of the same material but suffused with an array of cylindrical air holes with diameters much
smaller than a wavelength. The average refractive index of the cladding is lower than that of the core.
(b) Photonic-crystal holey fiber with cladding that contains a periodic array of large air holes and a
solid core (dotted circle). (c) Photonic-crystal holey fiber with cladding that contains a periodic array
of large air holes and a core that is an air hole of a different size (dotted circle).
Effective-Index Guidance
If the hole diameter is much smaller than the wavelength of light (4 < Л), then the
periodic cladding behaves approximately as a homogeneous medium whose effective
refractive index nz is equal to the average refractive index of the holey material [see
Fig. 10.4-1(а)]. Waveguiding is then achieved by making use of a solid core with index
пл > Neg, so that the light is guided by total internal reflection as with conventional
optical fibers. In this configuration, the holes serve merely as distributed “negative
dopants” that reduce the refractive index of the cladding below that of the solid core.
The holes can therefore be randomly, rather than periodically, arrayed and they need
not be axially continuous.

If the size of the holes is not much smaller than the wavelength, then the holey
cladding must be treated as a two-dimensional periodic medium [Fig. 10.4-1(b)]. The
effective refractive index nz is then given by the average refractive index, weighted by
the optical intensity distribution in the medium, and is therefore strongly dependent
on the wavelength, as well as on the size and the geometry of the holes. Since waves
of shorter wavelength are more confined in the medium of higher refractive index,
the effective refractive index of the cladding п2(Л) is a decreasing function of the
wavelength. A similar effect occurs in a 1D photonic crystal, for which the effective
refractive index is an increasing function of frequency at frequencies in the lowest pho-
tonic band (see Fig. 7.2-6). The holey fiber is therefore endowed with strong waveguide
dispersion, which can be a useful feature.

One consequence of the waveguide dispersion is that the holey fiber may operate as
a single-mode structure over a broad range of wavelengths, possibly stretching from the
infrared to the ultraviolet." This property, called endless single-mode guidance, results
when the V parameter of the fiber, У = (27a/A)\/n7 — n3(A), is approximately
independent of Л. This condition arises when the effective index n2(A) decreases with
increasing in such a way that \/’n? — n3(A) o Л. For a conventional optical fiber, in
contrast, М is inversely proportional to Л so that single-mode behavior at a particular
wavelength (V < 2.405) morphs into multimode behavior for wavelengths that are
sufficiently short such that V exceeds 2.405.

Another interesting feature is the feasibility of achieving large mode-area (LMA)
single-mode operation. Optical fibers with large mode areas are useful for applications

1 See Т. A. Birks, J. C. Knight, and P. St J. Russell, Endlessly Single-Mode Photonic Crystal Fibre, Optics
Letters, vol. 22, pp. 961-963, 1997.

428 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS

requiring the delivery of high optical powers. In a conventional optical fiber the con-
dition for single-mode operation [М = 27(a/X,)NA < 2.405] can be met for a large
core diameter 2a by making use of a small numerical aperture. Similarly, in holey
fibers the guided-mode size can be increased by increasing the hole-to-hole spacing
A (thereby increasing the core diameter) and concomitantly using holes of smaller
diameter d (thereby reducing the numerical aperture and allowing the field to penetrate
farther into the cladding). Dramatic increases in mode area for relatively small changes
in hole size have been observed and mode areas several order of magnitudes greater
than those in conventional optical fibers have been reported.

Photonic-Bandgap Guidance

The cladding of a holey fiber may be regarded as a two-dimensional photonic crystal.
The triangular-hole microstructure shown in Fig. 10.4-1(6), for example, has a disper-
sion diagram endowed with photonic bandgaps, as shown in Fig. 7.3-3 and discussed
in Sec. 7.3A. If the optical frequency lies within the photonic bandgap, propagation
through the cladding is prohibited and the fiber serves as a photonic-crystal waveguide
(see Sec. 9.5).

A photonic-crystal fiber (PCF) may have a solid or hollow core, as illustrated in
Figs. 10.4-1(6) and (с), respectively. Fibers with hollow cores cannot operate by means
of effective-index guidance, i.e., guidance cannot be based on total internal reflection.
In any case, there are a number of merits to using hollow-core PCFs: (1) A guided
wave traveling in an air-core PCF suffers lower losses as well as reduced nonlinear
effects and can thus carry greater optical power; (2) light in the mid-ultraviolet re-
gion that would cause damage and degradation in solid-core fibers can be guided and
transmitted; (3) light can be guided at wavelengths where transparent materials are not
available; and (4) atoms, molecules, gases, and other subwavelength structures can be
placed within the hollow core.

Applications

Photonic-crystal fibers offer many unique design possibilities and applications. As an
example, dispersion flattening over broad wavelength ranges can be achieved, and
the dispersion can be shifted to wavelengths below that at which the material disper-
sion is zero. PCFs support the propagation of high-intensity femtosecond pulses and
their compression to sub-carrier-cycle durations. Long interaction lengths and tight
confinement permit nonlinear optical effects such as low-threshold stimulated Raman
scattering, harmonic generation, and electromagnetic-induced transparency to be in-
vestigated. The birefringence properties of such fibers can be tailored in interesting and
useful ways. Acousto-optic interactions can be fostered and examined. PCFs can be
used to construct broadband (mid infrared to mid ultraviolet) supercontinuum sources,
mode-locked fiber soliton lasers, and powerful fiber lasers operating over a broad range
of wavelengths.

Photonic-crystal fibers can be readily used as dynamic sensors for strain, tempera-
ture, and electric field. Pressure and heat serve to modify the sizes of the air holes,
which in turn modifies their optical properties. Hollow-core fibers can be used to
inspect, characterize, manipulate, trap, and accelerate objects such as living cells, col-
loids, clusters, and nm-size particles. Gases, liquids, or metabolites can be diffused
into a hollow-core PCF, where light is trapped, thereby allowing ultrasensitive optical
measurements to be carried out. Moreover, the hollow channels within the PCFs can
be filled with materials such as metals, semiconductors, or soft glasses. This allows
nanometer-scale features to be incorporated in the fibers, thereby leading to devices
with both fiber-optic and plasmonic features.

10.5 FIBERMATERIALS 429
10.5 FIBER MATERIALS

As discussed throughout this chapter, a principal use of optical fibers is for near-
infrared optical fiber communications and data-transmission systems. The preeminent
material for fabricating these fibers is silica glass since this medium exhibits low
loss in the 1.3-1.6-или telecommunications band, as described in Sec. 10.3A. Spe-
cialty fibers, which are optical fibers endowed with at least one special property that
distinguishes them from standard silica-glass optical fibers, are also used in a many
applications. Such fibers may, for example, be double-clad, polarization-maintaining,
radiation-resistant, or doped with laser-active rare-earth ions.
Mid-Infrared Fibers
Interest in fiber optics extends beyond the near-infrared region. The mid infrared,
for example, offers a substantial number of material choices, including fluoride, ger-
manate, tellurite, and chalcogenide glasses. Of these, the chalcogenides (which in-
clude sulfides, selenides, and tellurides) exhibit the broadest transparency windows.
The melting/processing temperatures of these so called soft glasses are substantially
lower than that of silica glass so they can be conveniently used to fabricate infrared
fibers via thermal fiber drawing; indeed, fibers fabricated from these three glasses are
commercially available.

Interest in these materials is significant since the Rayleigh inverse fourth-power law
(see Secs. 5.6B and 10.3A) predicts a reduction of Rayleigh scattering, and absorption
further into the infrared, than that in silica glass. The attenuation arising from Rayleigh
scattering in fluoride-glass infrared fibers, for example, is expected to be approximately
ten times smaller than that for silica-glass optical fibers, reaching a minimum of ~ 0.01
dB/km at Л. = 2.5 ит. This issue is, of course, significant only when extrinsic loss
mechanisms do not dominate transmission loss.

In spite of the extensive choice of optical fiber materials in the mid infrared, in the
current state of technology the optical and mechanical properties of these fibers are
substantially inferior to those of conventional silica optical fibers. With the notable
exception of fluoride-glass fibers, most mid-infrared fibers exhibit transmission losses
in the dB/m range, whereas silica-glass fibers are far more transparent with losses
in the dB/km range. The use of most mid-infrared fibers is thus currently limited to
applications that involve fiber lengths of the order of meters rather than kilometers, 1.е.,
to short-haul applications such as sensing, metrology, biomedicine, and the delivery
of infrared-laser power. These limitations are ultimately expected to be overcome,
however.

Multimaterial and Multifunctional Fibers

Hybrid mid-infrared fibers. The ability to co-draw fibers comprising heteroge-
neous materials has led to the development of hybrid fibers that offer promise for
ameliorating some of the optical and mechanical shortcomings of conventional mid-
infrared fibers discussed above. Several examples of hybrid mid-infrared fibers are:
(1) Step-index fibers comprising a chalcogenide glass core with claddings of polymer
(as a protective jacket), silica-glass, or tellurite-glass; (2) Step-index fibers comprising
a semiconductor crystalline core such as InSb, ZnSe, Si, or Ge, with borosilicate-glass
or silica-glass cladding. In connection with photonic-crystal fibers (PCFs), as discussed
in Sec. 10.4, examples are: (3) Chalcogenide or fluoride glass solid-core PCFs; and (4)
Silica or chalcogenide hollow-core PCFs.

1 See С. Тао, Н. Ebendorff-Heidepriem, А. М. Stolyarov, 5. Danto, J. У. Badding, У. Fink, J. Ballato, and
A. Е. Abouraddy, Infrared Fibers, Advances in Optics and Photonics, vol. 7, pp. 379-458, 2015.

430 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS

Multimaterial fibers. Multimaterial fibers comprise combinations of materials. As
alluded to in Sec. 10.4, optical fibers have been developed that incorporate not only
glasses, but also conductors, semiconductors, insulators, and gases, along with more
specialized materials such as liquid crystals and piezoelectric media. Nowadays, ther-
mally drawn fibers that are kilometers long can be internally structured with elaborate
macroscopic device architectures that incorporate these materials. Moreover, the ulti-
mate composition of a fiber can differ from that of the initial materials by virtue of
chemical reactions initiated by the heating and drawing processes (e.g., initial ingredi-
ents of aluminum metal and silica glass can result in a fiber whose core is crystalline
silicon). Multimaterial fibers can be configured to sense light, sound, and/or heat im-
pinging on their lateral surfaces. They can also be operated in reverse, i.e., to emit light
and sound.

Multifunctional fibers and fiber assemblies. Multifunctional fibers, on the other
hand, accommodate multitudinal functionalities. Beyond integrating multiple func-
tional components into individual fibers, large-scale fiber arrays and fiber textiles can
be fabricated. Multimaterial and multifunctional fibers and fiber assemblies offer a
panoply of functionalities: photonic, electronic, mechanical, thermal, acoustic, chemi-
cal, and biomedical. Moreover, subwavelength internal structures of nanometer length
scales can be organized within fibers of kilometer length scales, resulting in devices
that merge fiber-optic and plasmonic features.

Examples. Some examples of multimaterial and multifunctional fibers are:

= An axially pumped photonic-bandgap fiber laser, comprising a core of organic

dye dissolved in a solid host as the gain medium, that emits light radially.

= Fibers engineered to detect sound by incorporating a piezoelectric plastic com-

ponent along the length of the fiber (a pressure wave induces a charge in the
piezoelectric material).

= Fibers designed to detect heat by incorporating a semiconductor component along

the length of the fiber (temperature modifies the conductivity).

= A flexible nonimaging textile camera woven from fibers that incorporate a

photoconductive-semiconductor or photoconductive-glass component along the
length of the fiber (light modifies the conductivity).

и A textile display woven from fibers that incorporate liquid-crystal channels (an

applied field serves to block or transmit light).

= A multifunctional polymer-fiber probe that allows concurrent optical, electrical,

and chemical interactions with a cell in a neural circuit.*
READING LIST
Books
See also the reading list on photonic crystals in Chapter 7 and the reading list in Chapter 9.
Е Mitschke, Fiber Optics: Physics and Technology, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2016.

1 See А. Е Abouraddy, М. Bayindir, С. Benoit, 5. О. Hart, К. Kuriki, М. Ош, О. Shapira, F Sorin,
В. Temelkuran, and У. Fink, Towards Multimaterial Multifunctional Fibres that See, Hear, Sense and
Communicate, Nature Materials, vol. 6, pp. 336-347, 2007; G. Tao, А. Е. Abouraddy, and А. М. Stolyarov,
Multimaterial Fibers, International Journal of Applied Glass Science, vol. 3, pp. 349-368, 2012.

* See A. Canales, X. Jia, U. P. Froriep, R. A. Koppes, C. M. Tringides, J. Selvidge, C. Lu, C. Hou, L. Wei,
Y. Fink, and P. Anikeeva, Multifunctional Fibers for Simultaneous Optical, Electrical and Chemical Interrogation
of Neural Circuits In Vivo, Nature Biotechnology, vol. 33, рр. 277—284, 2015.

READING LIST 431

Y. Koike, Fundamentals of Plastic Optical Fibers, Wiley-VCH, 2015.

J. Hecht, Understanding Fiber Optics, Laser Light Press, 5th ed. 2015.

Е. Zolla, С. Renversez, A. Nicolet, В. Kuhlmey, $. Guenneau, О. Felbacq, A. Argyros, and $. Leon-
Saval, Foundations of Photonic Crystal Fibres, Imperial College Press (London), 2nd ed. 2012.

A. Kumar and A. Ghatak, Polarization of Light with Applications in Optical Fibers, SPYE Optical
Engineering Press, 2011.

R. Paschotta, Field Guide to Optical Fiber Technology, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2010.

Е. Poli, A. Cucinotta, and $. Selleri, Photonic Crystal Fibers: Properties and Applications, Springer-
Verlag, 2007, paperback ed. 2010.

M. G. Kuzyk, Polymer Fiber Optics: Materials, Physics, and Applications, CRC Press/Taylor &
Francis, 2007.

A. Méndez and T. F. Morse, eds., Specialty Optical Fibers Handbook, Academic Press, 2007.

C. DeCusatis and C. J. Sher DeCusatis, Fiber Optic Essentials, Academic Press/Elsevier, 2005.

A. Galtarossa and C. R. Menyuk, eds., Polarization Mode Dispersion, Springer-Verlag, 2005.

J. A. Harrington, Infrared Fibers and Their Applications, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2004.

А. Bjarklev, J. Broeng, and А. $. Bjarklev, Photonic Crystal Fibers, Springer-Verlag, 2003, paperback
ed. 2012.

J. Hecht, City of Light: The Story of Fiber Optics, Oxford University Press, 1999, paperback ed. 2004.

C. K. Kao, Optical Fiber Systems: Technology, Design, and Applications, McGraw-Hill, 1982.

D. Marcuse, Light Transmission Optics, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1972, 2nd ed. 1982; Krieger, reis-
sued 1989.

D. Marcuse, Principles of Optical Fiber Measurements, Academic Press, 1981.

Review Articles on Photonic-Crystal, Multicore, Multimaterial, and Infrared Fibers

G. Tao, H. Ebendorff-Heidepriem, A. M. Stolyarov, S. Danto, J. V. Badding, Y. Fink, J. Ballato, and
A. Е. Abouraddy, Infrared Fibers, Advances in Optics and Photonics, vol. 7, рр. 379-458, 2015.

T. Hayashi, Multi-Core Optical Fibers, in I. Р. Kaminow, Т. Li, and A. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber
Telecommunications VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

С. Tao, A. Е. Abouraddy, and A. М. Stolyarov, Multimaterial Fibers, International Journal of Applied
Glass Science, vol. 3, рр. 349-368, 2012.

А. Е Abouraddy, М. Bayindir, С. Benoit, $. О. Hart, К. Kuriki, М. Orf, О. Shapira, Е. Sorin,
В. Temelkuran, and У. Fink, Towards Multimaterial Multifunctional Fibres that See, Hear, Sense
and Communicate, Nature Materials, vol. 6, pp. 336-347, 2007.

P. Russell, Photonic Crystal Fibers, Science, vol. 299, рр. 358-362, 2003.

J. C. Knight, J. Broeng, T. A. Birks, and P. St. J. Russell, Photonic Band Gap Guidance in Optical
Fibers, Science, vol. 282, pp. 1476-1478, 1998.

Seminal Articles

P. J. Winzer, C. J. Chang-Hasnain, A. E. Willner, R. C. Alferness, R. W. Tkach, and T. G. Giallorenzi,
eds., А Third of a Century of Lightwave Technology: January 1983—April 2016, ТЕЕЕ-ОЗА, 2016.

C. K. Kao, Sand from Centuries Past: Send Future Voices Fast (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 2009), in
L. Brink, ed., Nobel Lectures in Physics 2006-2010, World Scientific, 2014, рр. 253-264.

D. B. Keck, ed., Selected Papers on Optical Fiber Technology, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 38), 1992.

J. Р. Pocholle, L. Jeunhomme, and L. D’Auria, Caractéristiques de la propagation guidée dans les
fibres multimodes a gradient d’indice (FMGI), Revue technique Thomson-CSF, vol. 13, рр. 727—
807, 1981.

P. J. B. Clarricoats, Optical Fibre Waveguides — A Review, in E. Wolf, ed., Progress in Optics, North-
Holland, 1976, vol. 14, pp. 327-402.

D. B. Keck, R. D. Maurer, and P. C. Schultz, On the Ultimate Lower Limit of Attenuation in Glass
Optical Waveguides, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 22, pp. 307-309, 1973.

D. Gloge and E. A. J. Marcatili, Multimode Theory of Graded-Core Fibers, Bell System Technical
Journal, vol. 52, рр. 1563-1578, 1973.

О. Gloge, Weakly Guiding Fibers, Applied Optics, vol. 10, pp. 2252—2258, 1971.

D. Gloge, Dispersion in Weakly Guiding Fibers, Applied Optics, vol. 10, pp. 2442—2445, 1971.

432 CHAPTER 10 FIBER OPTICS
PROBLEMS

10.1-1 Coupling Efficiency.

(a) A source emits light with optical power Ро and a distribution [(@) = (1/7)Po созб,
where Г(0) is the power per unit solid angle in the direction making an angle @ with the
axis of a fiber. Show that the power collected by the fiber is Р = (МА)? Ру, so that the
coupling efficiency is (NA)?, where NA is the numerical aperture of the fiber.

(b) If the source is a planar light-emitting diode of refractive index п. bonded to the fiber,
and the fiber cross-sectional area is larger than the LED emitting area, calculate the
numerical aperture of the fiber and the coupling efficiency when п, = 1.46, ng =
1.455, and п. = 3.5.

10.1-2 Numerical Aperture of a Graded-Index Fiber. Compare the numerical apertures of a
step-index fiber with п: = 1.45 and A = 0.01 and a graded-index fiber with п: = 1.45,
A = 0.01, and a parabolic refractive-index profile (p = 2). (See Exercise 1.3-2.)

10.2-1 Modes. A step-index fiber has radius a = 5 jum, core refractive index ny = 1.45, and
fractional refractive-index change A = 0.002. Determine the shortest wavelength Л. for
which the fiber is a single-mode waveguide. If the wavelength is changed to \./2, identify
the indices (1, m) of all the guided modes.

10.2-2 Modal Dispersion. A step-index fiber of numerical aperture NA = 0.16, core radius a =
45 yum, and core refractive index nj = 1.45 is used at A, = 1.3 wm, where material
dispersion is negligible. If a light pulse of very short duration enters the fiber at $ = 0 and
travels a distance 1 km, sketch the shape of the received pulse:

(a) using ray optics and assuming that only meridional rays are allowed;

(b) using wave optics and assuming that only meridional ({ = 0) modes are allowed.

10.2-3 Propagation Constants and Group Velocities. A step-index fiber with refractive indices
пл = 1.444 and ng = 1.443 operates at Л. = 1.55 wm. Determine the core radius at which
the fiber V parameter is 10. Use Fig. 10.2-3 to estimate the propagation constants of all the
guided modes with [ = 0. If the core radius is now changed so that М = 4, use Fig. 10.2-
6(a) to determine the phase velocity, the propagation constant, and the group velocity of the
LPo: mode. Ignore the effect of material dispersion.

*10.2-4 Propagation Constants and Wavevector (Step-Index Fiber). A step-index fiber of radius

а = 20 wm and refractive indices n; = 1.47 and no = 1.46 operates at A, = 1.55 pum.

Using the quasi-plane wave theory and considering only guided modes with [ = 1:

(a) determine the smallest and largest propagation constants;

(b) for the mode with the smallest propagation constant, determine the radii of the cylin-
drical shell within which the wave is confined, and determine the components of the
wavevector К at r = 5 pum.

*10.2-5 Propagation Constants and Wavevector (Graded-Index Fiber). Carry out the same cal-

culations as in Prob. 10.2-4, but for a graded-index fiber with parabolic profile (p = 2).

10.3-3 Scattering Loss. At a wavelength of A, = 820 nm, the absorption loss of a fiber is
0.25 dB/km and the scattering loss is 2.25 dB/km. If the fiber is instead used at A, =
600 nm, and calorimetric measurements of the heat generated by light absorption reveal a
loss of 2 dB/km, estimate the total attenuation at A, = 600 nm.

10.3-4 Modal Dispersion in Step-Index Fibers. Determine the core radius of a multimode step-
index fiber with a numerical aperture NA = 0.1 if the number of modes М = 5000
when the wavelength is 0.87 jm. If the core refractive index n, = 1.445, the group index
№! = 1.456, and A are approximately independent of wavelength, determine the modal-
dispersion response time о. for a 2-km-long fiber.

10.3-5 Modal Dispersion in Graded-Index Fibers. Consider a graded-index fiber with a/A, =
10, ny = 1.45, A = 0.01, and power-law profile with index р. Determine the number of
modes М, and the modal-dispersion pulse-broadening rate о’. /L, for p = 1.9, 2, 2.1, oo.

10.3-6 Pulse Propagation. Consider a pulse of initial temporal width 7) transmitted through a
graded-index fiber of length Г, km and power-law refractive-index profile with index р. The
peak refractive index пл is wavelength-dependent with О» = —(A./co) d?n1/dd2, A is
approximately independent of wavelength, сл is the spectral width of the source, and A, is
the operating wavelength. Discuss the effect of increasing each of the following parameters
on the temporal width of the received pulse: L, то, р, |D |, ол, and Av.

CHAPTER
eee
11.1 PLANAR-MIRROR RESONATORS 436

A. Resonator Modes
B. Off-Axis Resonator Modes
11.2 SPHERICAL-MIRROR RESONATORS 447
A. Ray Confinement
B. Gaussian Modes
C. Resonance Frequencies
D. Hermite—Gaussian Modes
*E. Finite Apertures and Diffraction Loss
11.3 TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL RESONATORS 459
A. Two-Dimensional Rectangular Resonators
B. Circular Resonators and Whispering-Gallery Modes
C. Three-Dimensional Rectangular Resonators
11.4 MICRORESONATORS AND NANORESONATORS 463
A. Rectangular Microresonators
В. Micropillars, Microdisks, and Microtoroids
С. Microspheres
О. Photonic-Crystal Microcavities
E. Plasmonic Resonators: Metallic Nanodisks and Nanospheres
% >
Charles Fabry Alfred Perot
(1867-1945) (1863-1925)
Working together, the French physicists Charles Fabry and Alfred Perot constructed an optical
resonator for use as an interferometer. Now known as the Fabry-Perot etalon, it is used extensively
in lasers.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
433

CSC
An optical resonator is the optical counterpart of an electronic resonant circuit. It
confines and stores light at resonance frequencies determined by its configuration. It is
conveniently viewed as an optical transmission system that incorporates feedback: light
is repeatedly reflected, or circulates, within its boundaries. Various optical-resonator
configurations are depicted in Fig. 11.0-1. The simplest of these, the Fabry-Perot
resonator, comprises two parallel planar mirrors; light is repeatedly reflected between
them while experiencing little loss. Other mirror configurations include spherical mir-
rors, ring arrangements, and rectangular two- and three-dimensional resonators.
Fiber-ring resonators and integrated-optic-ring resonators are widely used.
Light can also be trapped in defects within dielectric photonic-bandgap periodic
structures, forming photonic-crystal resonators. Guided-wave Fabry-Perot res-
onators make use of Fresnel reflection at the boundaries between semiconductors
and air. Periodic dielectric structures such as distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs) can
serve in lieu of conventional mirrors in Fabry—Perot resonators, providing feedback
in structures such as micropillar resonators. Dielectric resonators make use of
total internal reflection, in place of conventional reflection, at the boundary between
low-loss dielectric materials. Microdisks, microtoroids, and microspheres support
light that circulates via reflection at near-grazing incidence, in what are known as
whispering-gallery modes. The confined rays skim around the inside rim of the
resonator with an angle of incidence that is always greater than the critical angle so they
do not refract out of the resonator. Plasmonic resonators are metallic structures of
subwavelength dimensions, such as nanodisks and nanospheres, that support surface
plasmon polariton waves and localized surface plasmon oscillations.
[7] [22
<
Planar-mirror Spherical-mirror Ring-mirror Rectangular-
(a) cavity
YX _A—
Co.
ООО Г
Fiber-ring Integrated-optic-ring Photonic-crystal
(b) (c)
A _
и Microdisk
я
: о SS —” — Microsphere Metallic-
@ Guided-wave (@) Micropillar () Microtoroid (g) nanosphere
Figure 11.0-1 Storage of light in optical resonators via: (a) multiple reflections from mirrors;
(b) propagation through closed-loop optical fibers and integrated-photonic waveguides; (c) trapping
of light within defects in photonic crystals; (d) multiple Fresnel reflections at semiconductor—air
boundaries; (e) reflections from periodic structures such as distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs);
(f) whispering-gallery mode reflections near the surfaces of dielectric microresonators such as disks,
toroids, and spheres; and (g) localized surface plasmon oscillations in metallic nanospheres.
434

CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS 435

The size of an optical resonator can be of the same order of magnitude as its reso-
nance wavelength, as with microresonators. But optical resonators can also be orders
of magnitude larger than the resonance wavelength, as with bulk mirror resonators;
or orders of magnitude smaller, as with metallic nanospheres. Figure 11.0-2 displays
the relationship between resonator size and resonance wavelength for a number of
electromagnetic resonators. Optical resonators are frequently characterized by two

Dielectric Metal #1
5 MRF — : | . li
2 Spherical-mirror и
Е = Microwave ao
о
x
mm < .
Integrated-optic- “ Electronic
ring a Figure 11.0-2 Resonator size a
ра vs. resonance wavelength Л» for var-
“ ious dielectric and metallic elec-
SEE» Dice:0:0:0ia tromagnetic resonators. The size-to-
ym = wavelength ratio belongs to one of
Microsphere three regimes: a/\, > 1 (unshaded
y region), a/A, = 1 (dotted diago-
ot Metallic- nal), and a/A, < 1 (shaded re-
<’ oO nanosphere gion). Metallic-nanosphere and elec-
р” | tronic resonators lie well within the
пт” shaded region.
nm pm mm m
Resonance wavelength Ло
key parameters, representing the degrees of temporal and spatial light confinement,
respectively:

1. The quality factor Q, which is proportional to the storage time of the resonator in

units of optical period; a large value of Q indicates strong temporal confinement;

2. The modal volume V, which is the volume occupied by the confined optical

mode; this measure is of particular interest for microresonators in which a small
value of V indicates tight spatial confinement.

Because of their frequency selectivity, optical resonators can also serve as optical
filters or spectrum analyzers (Sec. 7.1B). Their most important use, however, is as a
“container” within which laser light can be generated and built up. The laser medium
(Sec. 16.1A) amplifies light inside the optical resonator while the resonator determines,
in part, the frequency and spatial distribution of the laser beam that is generated.
Because resonators have the capacity to store energy, they can also be used to produce
pulses of laser energy (Sec. 16.4A). Lasers are discussed in Chapters 16 and 18, and
the material presented in this chapter is essential to their understanding.

This Chapter
The theoretical approaches considered in previous chapters are useful for describing
the operation of optical resonators:

1. The simplest approach is based on Ray Optics (Chapter 1); optical rays are traced

as they repeatedly reflect within the resonator and geometrical conditions are
established that assure that the rays are confined.

436 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS

2. Wave Optics (Chapter 2) is used to determine the modes of a resonator, 1.е., the
resonance frequencies and wavefunctions of the optical waves that are permitted
to exist self-consistently within the resonator.

3. The study of Beam Optics (Chapter 3) is useful for understanding the behavior
of spherical-mirror resonators; the modes of a resonator with spherical mirrors
give rise to Gaussian and Laguerre—Gaussian optical beams.

4. Fourier Optics and the theory of light propagation and diffraction (Chapter 4)
determine how the finite sizes of resonator mirrors affect resonator loss and the
spatial characteristics of the ensuing modes.

5. Electromagnetic Optics (Chapter 5) provides a treatment of scattering that is
fundamental to understanding the resonant feedback in coherent random lasers.

6. Polarization Optics (Chapter 6) sets forth the Fresnel relations, which establish
the reflectances at the boundaries between semiconductors and air in guided-
wave Fabry-Perot resonators.

7. Photonic-Crystal Optics, including the optics of multilayer media (Chapter 7),
is important for describing optical resonators that make use of multiple dielec-
tric layers and periodic media (e.g., distributed Bragg reflectors and photonic
crystals) in lieu of conventional mirrors.

8. The analysis of oscillating electric charges (localized surface plasmons) in
metals, considered in the Optics of Metals and Metamaterials (Chapter 8), is
crucial for understanding the behavior of nanoresonators such as the metallic
nanosphere.

9. The methods used in Guided-Wave Optics (Chapter 9) for determining the modes
of planar-mirror and planar dielectric waveguides are similar to those required for
the analysis of resonator modes.

10. Fiber Optics (Chapter 10) provides an analysis of the modes supported by optical
fibers; the fiber laser resonator is an optical fiber bounded by end reflectors that
result in the repeated reflection and confinement of the propagating light.

The optical resonator evidently provides a comprehensive venue for applying the the-
ories of light discussed in earlier chapters. We begin with a study of planar-mirror
resonators in Sec. 11.1 and spherical-mirror resonators in Sec. 11.2. We then introduce
two- and three-dimensional resonators in Sec. 11.3 and finally consider microres-
onators and nanoresonators in Sec. 11.4.
11.1 PLANAR-MIRROR RESONATORS
A. Resonator Modes
In this section we examine the modes of an optical resonator constructed from two
parallel, highly reflective, flat mirrors separated by a distance d (Fig. 11.1-1). This
simple one-dimensional resonator is known as a Fabry-Perot resonator. We first
consider an idealized version of this resonator in which the mirrors are lossless; the
effect of losses is included subsequently.
(a) —— ) =F
а ка
Figure 11.1-1 Т\уо-титог planar resonator (Еабгу-Рего! resonator). (a) Light rays perpendicular
to the mirrors reflect back and forth without escaping. (b) Rays that are only slightly inclined
eventually escape. Rays also escape if the mirrors are not perfectly parallel.

11.1 PLANAR-MIRROR RESONATORS 437
Resonator Modes as Standing Waves
As discussed in Secs. 2.2, 5.3, and 5.4, a monochromatic wave of frequency и has а
wave function
u(r, t) = Re {U(r) exp(j2vt)}, (11.1-1)
representing a transverse component of the electric field. The complex amplitude U(r)
satisfies the Helmholtz equation, V?U(r) + k?U(r) = 0, where k = 2ли/с is the
wavenumber and c is the speed of light in the medium. The resonator modes are the
solutions to the Helmholtz equation under the appropriate boundary conditions. For the
lossless planar-mirror resonator, the transverse components of the electric field vanish
at the mirror surfaces (see Sec. 5.1), so that U(r) = 0 at the planes z = 0 and z = d
in Fig. 11.1-2.
ЛА =” A - ANA Figure 11.1-2 (а) Wave function u(r, t) for an
[\ LY А А LY А А \ ideal planar-mirror mode as a function of z (for
| АЛ АЛ АЛ АЛ АЛ АЛ А 2 x = у = 0), portrayed at several different times.

VV MVM [м Ум In this illustration, 14 half-wavelengths match the
z=0 pd z=d length of the resonator so that the mode number
x №2 —1 | 4 = d/(A/2) = 14. (6) Spatial distribution of the

magnitude |u(r,t)| as a function of x and z (for

> y = 0) at a particular time, represented on a color

5 scale where red represents а large magnitude and
white represents zero.

The standing wave U(r) = Asin kz, where A is a constant, satisfies the Helmholtz
equation and vanishes at z = 0 and z = а if k satisfies the condition kd = дл, where
q is an integer. This restricts К to the values

п
№ = 155 q=1,2,..., (11.1-2)
so that the modes have complex amplitudes

U(r) = Agsinkgz, (11.1-3)
where the A, are constants. Negative values of 4 do not constitute independent modes
since sink_,z = —sink,z. Furthermore, the value 4 = 0 is associated with a mode
that carries no energy since kg = 0 and sinkgz = 0. The modes of the resonator
are therefore the standing waves A, sink,z, where the positive integer 4 = 1,2,...
is called the mode number. An arbitrary wave inside the resonator can be written in

terms of a superposition of the resonator modes:
U(r) = So Ag sin ви. (11.1-4)

q

It follows from (11.1-2) that the associated frequencies и = ck/27 are restricted to

the discrete values
с
7 = 951, а=1,2,..., (11.1-5)

438 — СНАРТЕВ11 RESONATOR OPTICS
which are the resonance frequencies. As illustrated in Fig. 11.1-3, adjacent resonance
frequencies are separated by a constant frequency difference, known as the free spec-
tral range:
с С
ивр = — = —°. (11.1-6)
24 2nd Frequency Spacing
of Resonator Modes
The associated resonance wavelengths are Л. = c/vg = 24/4. The round-trip distance
traversed at resonance must therefore precisely equal an integer number of wave-
lengths:
24 = qr; qg=1,2,.... (11.1-7)
It is important to keep in mind that c = c,/n is the speed of light in the medium
between the two mirrors, and that the Л. represent wavelengths within that medium.
| *-5а
| НИНЫ
ии Yq бан и
<~— q _ Cc
= ия —|
0 и V2 V3 и
Resonator Resonant frequencies
Figure 11.1-3 The adjacent resonance frequencies of a planar-mirror resonator are separated by
Vp = c/2d = c,/2nd, as illustrated by two examples: (a) А 30-cm long resonator (d = 30 cm) with
air between the mirrors (rn = 1) has a frequency spacing between modes given by vp = 500 MHz.
(5) A much shorter resonator with d = 3 wm has vp = 50 THz, so that the first mode has a frequency
corresponding to a wavelength of 6 zm and there are only two modes within the 700—900-nm optical
band, which occupies a frequency range of 95 THz.
Resonator Modes as Traveling Waves
Alternatively, the resonator modes can be determined by following a wave as it travels
back and forth between the two mirrors [Fig. 11.1-4(а)]. A mode is a wave that repro-
duces itself after a single round trip (see Appendix C). The phase shift imparted by a
single round trip of propagation (a distance 2d), р = k2d = 4nvd/c, must therefore
be a multiple of 27:
ф = k2d = q2r, g=1,2,.... (11.1-8)
This result is not altered by an additional phase shift of 27, which can be imparted
by reflections at the two mirrors (see Sec. 6.2). As expected, we therefore obtain
kd = дт, as in (11.1-2), and the same resonance frequencies as set forth in (11.1-
5). Equation (11.1-8) may be viewed as a condition of positive feedback in the system
displayed in Fig. 11.1-4(5); this requires that the output of the system be fed back in
phase with the input.
We now demonstrate that only self-reproducing waves, or combinations thereof, can
exist within the resonator under steady-state conditions. Consider a monochromatic

11.1. PLANAR-MIRROR RESONATORS 439
Mirror 1 Mirror 2 ze
—\

U3 Ue JP у
CS \ р р
о 0 U т
SS eran Qs
P Uo

ф=42”
(а) (Б) (с)

Figure 11.1-4 (a) А wave reflects back and forth between the resonator mirrors, suffering а phase
shift ф on each round trip. (b) Block diagram of an optical feedback system with a phase delay y.
(с) Phasor diagram representing the sum U = Up + (1 + --- for yp  q2z and for y = 42т.
plane wave of complex amplitude Up at point P traveling to the right along the axis of
the resonator [see Fig. 11.1-4(а)]. The wave is reflected from mirror 2 and propagates
back to mirror 1 where it is again reflected. Its amplitude then becomes Uj. Yet another
round trip results in a wave of complex amplitude U2, and so on ad infinitum. Because
the original wave Up is monochromatic, it is “eternal.” Indeed, all of the partial waves,
Up, U;, U2, ... are monochromatic and perpetually coexist. Moreover, their magnitudes
are identical because it has been assumed that there is no loss associated with reflection
and propagation. The total wave U is therefore represented by the sum of an infinite
number of phasors of equal magnitude,

U =U) + U,4+U24+::-, (11.1-9)
as shown in Figs. 11.1-4(b) and (с).

The phase difference of two consecutive phasors imparted by a single round trip
of propagation is ф = k2d. If the magnitude of the initial phasor is infinitesimal, the
magnitude of each of these phasors must also be infinitesimal. The magnitude of the
sum of this infinite number of infinitesimal phasors is itself infinitesimal unless they
are aligned, i.e., unless ф = q27, as illustrated at the bottom of Fig. 11.1-4(c). Thus,
an infinitesimal initial wave can result in the buildup of finite power in the resonator,
but only Шф = q27.

Traveling-Wave Resonators

In a traveling-wave resonator, an optical mode travels in one direction along a closed
path representing a round trip and retraces itself without reversing direction. Examples
are the ring resonator and the bow-tie resonator illustrated in Fig. 11.1-5. The reso-
nance frequencies of the modes may be obtained by equating the round-trip phase shift
to 27. Each of the set of modes traveling in the clockwise direction has a corresponding
mode of the same resonance frequency traveling in the counterclockwise direction, and
the matching modes are said to be degenerate.
НИ
EXERCISE 11.1-1

Resonance Frequencies of a Traveling-Wave Resonator. Derive expressions for the res-
onance frequencies и, and their frequency spacing ир for the three-mirror ring and the four-mirror
bow-tie resonator shown in Fig. 11.1-5. Assume that each mirror reflection introduces a phase shift
of 7.

440 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
а 2d =.
(a) Ring resonator (b) Bow-tie resonator
Figure 11.1-5 Traveling-wave resonators. (a) Three-mirror ring resonator. (5) Four-mirror bow-tie
resonator.
ee
Density of Modes
The number of modes per unit frequency is the inverse of the frequency spacing be-
tween modes, 1.е., 1/ир = 2d/c in each of the two orthogonal polarizations. The
density of modes M(v), which is the number of modes per unit frequency per unit
length of the resonator, is therefore
4
Mv)=-. (11.1-10)
с Density of Modes
(1D Resonator)
The number of modes in a resonator of length d, in the frequency interval Av, is thus
(4/c)dAv. This represents the number of degrees of freedom for the optical waves
existing in the resonator, i.e., the number of independent ways in which these waves
may be arranged.
Losses and Resonance Spectral Width
The strict condition on the frequencies of optical waves that are permitted to exist
inside a resonator is relaxed when the resonator has losses. Consider again Fig. 11.1-
4(a) and follow the initial wave inside the resonator, Uo, in its excursions between
the two mirrors. As discussed above, the result is the infinite sum of phasors shown in
Fig. 11.1-4(c) and the phase difference imparted by propagation through a single round
trip is
yp = 2kd = 4rvd/c. (11.1-11)
Reflection at the two mirrors can impart an additional phase shift, usually 277.
However, in the presence of loss the phasors are not all of equal magnitude. Two
successive phasors are related by a complex round-trip amplitude attenuation factor
h = те 1? resulting from losses associated with the two mirror reflections and the
absorption in the medium (the corresponding intensity attenuation factor for a round
trip is |r|? with |r| < 1). Thus, U; = hUp and, in fact, U2 is related to U; by this same
complex factor h, as are all consecutive phasor pairs. The net result is the superposition
of an infinite number of waves, each distinguished from the previous one by a constant
phase shift and an amplitude that is geometrically reduced. It is readily seen that U =
Оо И: + 05 -+--: = Up + hUp + 20+... = Up(1+ht+h?+---) = Uo/(1—h).
The net result, U = U,/(1 — h), is easily understood in terms of the simple feedback
configuration pictured in Fig. 11.1-4(6).

11.1 PLANAR-MIRROR RESONATORS 441

The intensity of the light in the resonator is therefore given by

Ul? 1
тор = М of se (11.1-12)
|1 — |rle-Je| 1 + |r|? — 2|r| созф
which can be written as
Трах I
[T= max ое. (11.1-13)
1+ (2F/7)* sin* (y/2) (1 — |r)
Here, Ig = |Uo|? is the intensity of the initial wave, and the finesse of the resonator is
/ |r
g a ту. (11.1-14)
1— |r| Finesse
Again, |r| is the magnitude of the round-trip attenuation factor.

The treatment offered above is nearly identical to that provided earlier in Sec. 2.5B,
where the complex round-trip amplitude attenuation factor was chosen to be h =
|h|e*I?. In the current context we instead select this factor to be h = |т|е 729 =
lrje~J? by dint of the fact that successive phasors arise from the delay of the wave
as it bounces between the mirrors. This distinction is superficial, however, and has no
bearing on the results.

Indeed, (11.1-13) is identical to (2.5-18), which is plotted in Fig. 2.5-10(b). The
intensity [(y) is a periodic function of y with period 27. For large F, I(y) has sharp
peaks centered about the values ф = g2z, which correspond to the alignment of all
phasors. The peaks have a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) described by Ay =
2n/F, in accordance with (2.5-21).

The internal resonator intensity J(~) in (11.1-13) can alternately be expressed as а
function of the optical frequency of an internal monochromatic wave, I(v), by virtue
of (11.1-11), which shows that y = 4поа /с. This function then takes the form

Трах rf
I= 2 = 2 ’ Imax = 0 р (11.1-15)
1+ (2F/r) за" (rv /vp) (1 — |r])
with vp = c/2d. This result is displayed in Fig. 11.1-6 and indeed it mirrors that de-
picted in Figs. 2.5-10 and 7.1-5. The maximum internal intensity J = I;,ax 18 attained
when the second term in the denominator is zero, 1.е., at the resonance frequencies
V = и = дик, g=1,2,.... (11.1-16)
The minimum intensity, attained at the midpoints between the resonances, is
Гоах
Та = Но. 11.1-17
1+ (235 /п)? ( )

When the finesse is large (F >> 1), it is clear that the spectral response of the

resonator is sharply peaked about the resonance frequencies and Гиш / Глах is small. In

442 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
1
Ра
(а) Figure 11.1-6 (а) In the steady state,
a lossless resonator (F = oo) sustains
light waves only at the precise resonance
и frequencies vy. (6) A lossy resonator
1 best sustains waves in the immediate
vicinity of the resonance frequencies,
(b) Up but it can sustain waves at other frequen-
F cies as well.
74-1 Yq Yq+1 и
that case, the FWHM of the resonance peaks is ди я vp/F since ди = (с/4па)Аф
and Ay = 27/F in accordance with (2.5-21). This simple result provides the rationale
for the definition of the finesse given in (11.1-14).
In short, the spectral response of the Fabry—Perot optical resonator is characterized
by two parameters:
= The frequency spacing vp between adjacent resonator modes:
с
Ив = =. (11.1-18)
2d Fre i
quency Spacing
= The spectral width dv of the individual resonator modes:
и
ium. (11.1-19)
У Spectral Width
Equation (11.1-19) is valid in the usual case when F > 1. The spectral width ди
is inversely proportional to the finesse 3. As the loss increases, F decreases and
ди therefore increases.
Sources of Resonator Loss
The two principal sources of loss in optical resonators are:
= Losses arising from imperfect reflection at the mirrors. There are two underlying
sources of reduced reflection: (1) a partially transmitting mirror is often deliber-
ately used in a resonator to permit laser light generated in the resonator to escape
through it; and (2) the finite size of the mirrors causes a fraction of the light
to leak around them and thereby to be lost. This latter effect also modifies the
spatial distribution of the reflected wave by truncating it to the size of the mirror.
The reflected light produces a diffraction pattern at the opposite mirror that is
again truncated. Such diffraction loss may be regarded as an effective reduction
of the mirror reflectance. Further details regarding diffraction loss are provided in
Sec. 11.2E.
= Losses attributable to absorption and scattering that occurs in the medium be-
tween the mirrors. The round-trip power attenuation factor associated with these
effects is exp(—2a,d), where a, is the loss coefficient of the medium associated
with absorption and scattering.

11.1 PLANAR-MIRROR RESONATORS 443
For mirrors of reflectances Ry = |r|? and Ry = |r2|”, the wave intensity decreases
by the factor R; Ry as a result of the two reflections associated with a single round trip.
These are referred to as “lumped losses” since they occur only at the discrete locations
where the mirrors are located. Accounting also for the “distributed losses” that take
place within the intervening medium yields a round-trip intensity attenuation factor
|"? = Ri Ro ехр(-2а,а), (11.1-20)
which is usually written in the form
|"? = exp(—2a,d), (11.1-21)
where сх, is an effective overall distributed-loss coefficient. Equating (11.1-20) and
(11.1-21), and taking the natural logarithm of both sides, allows a,. to be written in
terms of the distributed and lumped loss parameters, a, and R1 Ry, respectively:
1 1
a, =a, + — n-—. (11.1-22)
24 Ri Rs Loss Coefficient
This can also be written as
Ap = As + Ami + Ame; (11.1-23)
where the quantities
1 1 1 1
= — In— = — Ш — 11.1-24
От 2а ‘д,’ Am2 2d бт, ( )
represent the effective distributed-loss coefficients associated with mirrors | and 2,
respectively.
These loss coefficients can be cast in a simpler form for mirrors of high reflectance.
If Ry = 1, then In(1/R,) = — In(R,) = —In{l — (1— R1)] & 1 — Ry, where we have
used the Taylor-series approximation In(1 — A) = —A, which is valid for |A| < 1.
This allows us to write
1-Х,
я. 11.1-25
Similarly, {2 = 1, we have ото © (1—2) /24. If, furthermore, 3: = Ry = Х = 1,
then
1-Х
Ay а: + ——. (11.1-26)
а
The finesse F can be expressed as а function of the effective loss coefficient a, Бу
substituting (11.1-21) in (11.1-14). The result is
—a,d/2
gp Терса, 9/2) (11.1-27)
1 — exp(—a,d)

444 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
which is plotted in Fig. 11.1-7. It is clear that the finesse decreases as the loss increases.
If the loss factor a,d < 1, then exp(—a,d) = 1 — a,d, whereupon
п
Fx —. (11.1-28)
ard Finesse and
Loss Factor
The finesse is thus inversely proportional to the loss factor a, in this limit.
|r|? = exp(-2a,d)
0.95 0.9 0.8 0.5 0.2
300 iN
Figure 11.1-7 Finesse of an opti-
в, 200 cal resonator versus the loss factor
) a,d, where a, is the effective overall
6 distributed-loss coefficient. The round-
= 100 trip intensity attenuation factor |r|? =
exp(—2a,d) is shown on the upper
abscissa.
0
0.01 0.1 1
Loss factor аа
ee
EXERCISE 11.1-2
Resonator Modes and Spectral Width. Determine the frequency spacing, and spectral width,
of the modes of a Fabry—Perot resonator whose mirrors have power reflectances of 0.98 and 0.99 and
are separated by a distance d = 100 cm. Assume that the medium has refractive index n = 1 and
negligible losses. Is the approximation used to derive (11.1-28) appropriate in this case?
ee
Photon Lifetime
The relationship between the resonance linewidth and resonator loss may be viewed
as a manifestation of the time-frequency uncertainty relation, as we now demonstrate.
Substituting (11.1-18) and (11.1-28) in (11.1-19), we obtain
c/2d ca
би = _</2а = —, (11.1-29)
п/а.а 2
Because a, is the loss per unit length, ca. represents the loss рег unit time. Defining
the characteristic decay time
1
Tp = — (11.1-30)
са.

11.1 PLANAR-MIRROR RESONATORS 445
as the resonator lifetime or photon lifetime, we obtain
1
би ——. (11.1-31)
2TTp
The time-frequency uncertainty product is thus dv - т, = 1/27. Resonance-line broad-
ening may therefore be considered to be a consequence of optical-energy decay arising
from resonator losses. An electric field that decays as exp(—t/27,), corresponding to
an energy that decays as exp(—t/7,), has a Fourier transform that is proportional to
1/(1+ j4avt,), which has a (FWHM) spectral width ди = 1/277, (see Sec. 14.3D).
Quality Factor Q
The quality factor Q is often used to characterize electrical resonance circuits and
microwave resonators. This parameter is defined as
tored
Q =2n СТВ (11.1-32)
energy loss per cycle
Large values of Q are associated with low-loss resonators. A series RLC' circuit has
resonance frequency м = 1/27/LC and quality factor Q = 271)L/R, where В,
Т, and С are the resistance, inductance, and capacitance of the resonance circuit,
respectively.

The quality factor of an optical resonator is determined by observing that the stored
energy Е is lost at the rate ca,E (per unit time), which is equivalent to the rate
ca, Е /vo (per cycle of the optical field), so that

2
gas. (11.1-33)
CO,
Since ди = ca,./2m in accordance with (11.1-29), we have
Qu. (11.1-34)
би
By virtue of (11.1-33), the quality factor is related to the resonator lifetime (photon
lifetime) т» = 1/ca, via
Q = 2пшть. (11.1-35)
The quality factor Q is thus understood to be the storage time of the resonator in units
of the optical period T = 1/vp.

Finally, combining (11.1-19) and (11.1-34) leads to a relationship between ©) and

the finesse F of the resonator:
Qw 2g, (11.1-36)
VE
Since optical resonator frequencies Vp are typically much greater than the mode spacing
vp, we have Q > F. Moreover, the quality factor of an optical resonator is typically
far greater than that of a resonator at microwave frequencies.

446 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
Summary
= Two parameters are convenient for characterizing the losses in an optical
resonator: the loss coefficient a, (cm~') and the photon lifetime Tp = 1/ca,
(s).
= Two dimensionless parameters characterize the quality of an optical res-
onator of length d operated at frequency vp: the finesse У я л/а, and
the quality factor © = 2mVpTp.
= Two frequencies describe the spectral characteristics of an optical resonator:
the frequency spacing between the modes vr = c/2d, known as the free
spectral range, and the spectral width ди = vp/F.
B. Off-Axis Resonator Modes
An optical resonator with perfectly parallel planar mirrors of infinite dimensions can
also support oblique, or off-axis, modes. A plane wave traveling at an angle 9 with
respect to the axis of the resonator (the z direction) bounces back and forth between
lossless mirrors [see Fig. 11.1-8(a)] as a guided wave traveling in the transverse direc-
tion (the x direction). Such guided waves were described in Sec. 9.1.

The boundary conditions at the mirrors dictate that the axial component of the
propagation constant, k, = kcos 6, is an integer multiple of 7/d. However, no such
condition is imposed on the transverse component k, since the resonator is open in the
x direction. Since К = 271//c, the condition k cos 9 = дп / а, where 4 is an integer, can
be written in the form

и = qursecé, q=1,2,..., (11.1-37)
where vp = c/2d. This relation, which is plotted in Fig 11.1-8(b), is equivalent
to the self-consistency condition for guided modes in planar-mirror waveguides (see
Sec. 9.1). It is also identical to the condition (7.1-37) for the peak transmittance of an
oblique wave through a Fabry-Perot etalon. As illustrated in Fig 11.1-8(c), at a given
frequency и, there are modes at a discrete set of angles 0, that satisfy the condition
cos 6, = quvr/v. These are the complements of the bounce angles of the guided modes
of a waveguide. Also, at any fixed angle 0, the modal frequencies are и, = дик sec 0,
as illustrated in Fig 11.1-8(d). The larger the inclination angle, the greater the spacing
between the modal frequencies.

| 09°

80°
70°
60° в
Е 40° Ш” [=] 2
ву 30° >
9 20° Vp sec 9
10° | Jot le
а ke 0° и
ог 4 бр,

(а) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 11.1-8 (a) Off-axis mode in a planar-mirror resonator. (b) Relation between mode angles
and resonance frequencies. (с) Off-axis modes at a fixed frequency и > vp. (d) Resonance
frequencies of an off-axis mode at a prescribed angle 0.

11.2 SPHERICAL-MIRROR RESONATORS 447
11.2 SPHERICAL-MIRROR RESONATORS

The planar-mirror resonator configuration discussed in the preceding section is highly
sensitive to misalignment. If the mirrors are not perfectly parallel, or the rays are not
perfectly normal to the mirror surfaces, they undergo a sequence of lateral displace-
ments that eventually causes them to wander out of the resonator [see Fig. 11.1-1(0)].
Spherical-mirror resonators, in contrast, provide a more stable configuration for the
confinement of light that renders them less sensitive to misalignment under appropriate
geometrical conditions.

A spherical-mirror resonator is constructed from two spherical mirrors of radii Вл
and Rp, separated by a distance d (Fig. 11.2-1). A line connecting the centers of
the mirrors defines the optical axis (z axis), about which the system exhibits circular
symmetry. Each of the mirrors can be concave (R < 0) or convex (R > 0). The planar-
mirror resonator is a special case for which R; = Rz = со. We first make use of the
results set forth in Sec. 1.4D and examine the conditions required for ray confinement.
Then, using the results derived in Chapter 3, we determine the resonator modes and
resonance frequencies. Finally, we briefly discuss the implications of finite mirror size.

Ry Ry
Figure 11.2-1 Geometry of a spherical-mirror
> resonator. In this illustration both mirrors are
concave (their radii of curvature are negative).
kk ¢ —__
A. Ray Confinement
We begin with ray optics to determine the conditions of confinement for light rays in
a spherical-mirror resonator. We consider only meridional rays (rays lying in a plane
that passes through the optical axis) and limit our consideration to paraxial rays (rays
that make small angles with the optical axis). The matrix-optics methods introduced in
Sec. 1.4, which are valid only for meridional and paraxial rays in a circularly symmetric
system, are thus suitable for studying the trajectories of these rays as they travel inside
the resonator.

A resonator is a periodic optical system, since a ray travels through the same system
after a round trip of two reflections. We may therefore make use of the analysis of
periodic optical systems presented in Sec. 1.4D. Let у» and 9», be the position and
inclination of an optical ray after m round trips, as illustrated in Fig. 11.2-2. Given ут,
and 6,,, we determine y,,41 and 0,,41 by tracing the ray through the system.

For paraxial rays, where all angles are small, the relation between (Yn+1,9m41) and
(Ym, 9m) is linear and can be written in matrix form as [see (1.4-3)]

Ym+1) _ А В Ут
22. aio
Beginning at the left of Fig. 11.2-2 with yo and 9%, the round-trip ray-transfer matrix
for the ray pattern shown is
10 10
ole allo She tb] aes
1 2

448 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
Ri Ry

Jip [8 Figure 11.2-2 The position and inclina-
— tion of a ray after m round trips are rep-
resented by у» and 6,,, respectively, where
т = 0,1,2,.... ш this diagram, 6; < 0 since
— SS > the ray is directed downward. Angles are
< | exaggerated for the purposes of illustration;
У т all rays are paraxial so that sin? = tan@ =
0 22 == 9 and the propagation distance of all rays
222 propag: y

ya between the mirrors is © d.

ыы

This cascade of ray-transfer matrices represents, from right to left [see (1.4-4) and
(1.4-9)]:

= Propagation a distance d through free space

= Reflection from a mirror of radius А2

= Propagation a distance d through free space

= Reflection from a mirror of radius Ry,

As shown in Sec. 1.40, the solution of the difference equation (11.2-1) is ут =
YmaxF™ зт(тф + yo), where Е? = AD — BC, ф = cos~'(b/F), b = (A+ D)/2,
and ушах and Yo are constants determined from the initial position and inclination of
the ray. For the case at hand Ё = 1, so that

Ym = Ymax Sin(my + Yo), (11.2-3)
d d
—1
= cos 6, b=2(1+— |1 — | —1. 11.2-4
и i) ( р)
The solution (11.2-3) is harmonic, and therefore bounded, provided y = cos! b is
real. This is ensured if |b] < 1, i.e., if —1 < 6 < 1, so that
d d
O0<(1+—){14+—] <1. 11.2-5
~ ( i) ( re) ~
It is convenient to write this confinement condition in terms of the quantities g, =
1+ d/R, and 92 = 1+ d/Ro, which are known as the g-parameters:
0 < mg < 1. (11.2-6)
Confinement Condition
The resonator is said to be stable when this condition is satisfied. This result also
emerges from wave optics, as will be demonstrated subsequently [see (11.2-17)].

When the confinement condition (11.2-6) is not satisfied, yp is imaginary so that уж
in (11.2-3) becomes a hyperbolic sine function of m and increases without bound. The
resonator is then said to be unstable. At the boundary of the confinement condition
(when the inequalities are equalities), the resonator is said to be conditionally stable.

A useful graphical representation of the confinement condition (Fig. 11.2-3) identi-
fies each combination (g1, 92) of the two g-parameters of a resonator as a point in a 92
versus 01 diagram. The left inequality in (11.2-6) is equivalent to {91 > 0 and 92 >
0; or 91 < O and 92 < 0} so that all stable points (91, 92) must lie in the first or third

11.2 SPHERICAL-MIRROR RESONATORS 449
quadrants. The right inequality in (11.2-6) signifies that stable points (91, 92) must lie
in a region bounded by the hyperbola g; 92 = 1. The unshaded area in Fig. 11.2-
3 represents the region for which both inequalities are satisfied, indicating that the
resonator is stable.

9
, a) Planar
и (Вт = Rp = ®) о
i b) Symmetric —
и confocal
Te ------- Se (Ry = Rp = -d)
ра с) Symmetric (>>)
bi” concentric
-1 и 0 1 2 91 (Ry = Ry = -d/2)
ра 4) Confocal/planar =
(Ri =-9, Rp =)
OU e) Concave/convex

5.5% (Ry <0, Ry >0) [— |

ve 1<0, >
Figure 11.2-3 Resonator stability diagram. А spherical-mirror resonator is stable if the parameters
Я = 14+ d/R, and gg = 1+ а/В. lie in the unshaded regions, which are bounded by the lines
91 = Oand 92 = 0, and the hyperbola gz = 1/91. В is negative for a concave mirror and positive for
a convex mirror. Commonly used resonator configurations are indicated by letters and are sketched
at the right; shaded areas represent collections of rays perpendicular to the mirrors. All symmetric
resonators lie along the line д2 = д1.

Symmetric resonators, by definition, have identical mirrors (Rj = А = В) so
that 01 = 92 = g. Resonators in this class are thus represented in Fig. 11.2-3 by points
lying along the line gz = 91. The condition of stability then becomes g? < 1, or
—1 < 1-+а/В < 1, which implies

а

0< ——~ <2. (11.2-7)
Confinement Condition
(Symmetric Resonator)
To satisfy (11.2-7) a stable symmetric resonator must use concave mirrors (В < 0)
whose radii are greater than half the resonator length. Three examples within this class
are of special interest: d/(—R) = 0, 1, and 2, corresponding to planar, confocal, and

concentric resonators, respectively.

In the symmetric confocal resonator, (—R) = d so that the center of curvature
of each mirror lies on the other. Thus, 6 = —1 and ф = т so that the ray position
in (11.2-3) is prescribed to be Ym = Ymax Sin(mm + Yo), 1.е., ут = (—1)' yo. Rays
initiated at position yo, at any inclination, are thus imaged to position у: = —yo, and
then reimaged again to position y2 = yo, and so on, repeatedly. Each ray thus retraces

450 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
itself after two round trips (Fig. 11.2-4). All paraxial rays are therefore confined,
whatever their original position and inclination. This is a substantial improvement in
comparison with the planar-mirror resonator, for which only rays of zero inclination
retrace themselves as schematized in Fig. 11.1-1.
Yo a yo / У2% / 54% f

Figure 11.2-4 All paraxial rays in a symmetric confocal resonator retrace themselves after two
round trips, whatever their original position and inclination. Angles are exaggerated in this drawing
for purposes of illustration.

Summary

The confinement condition for paraxial rays in a spherical-mirror resonator, com-

prising mirrors of radii А! and Во separated by a distance 4, 150 < gi gz <

1, where 9: = 1+ d/R, and 492 = 1+ d/Rg. The confinement condition

for symmetric resonators is 0 < d/(—R) < 2; this condition governs planar,

symmetric confocal, and symmetric concentric mirror configurations.
ee
EXERCISE 11.2-1
Maximum Resonator Length for Confined Rays. А resonator is constructed using concave
mirrors of radii 50 cm and 100 cm. Determine the maximum resonator length for which rays satisfy
the confinement condition.
НИ
В. Gaussian Modes
Although the ray-optics approach considered in the preceding section is useful for de-
termining the geometrical conditions under which rays are confined, it cannot provide
information about the resonance frequencies and spatial intensity distributions of the
resonator modes. For those quantities we must appeal to wave optics. We now proceed
to show that Gaussian beams are solutions of the paraxial Helmholtz equation for the
boundary conditions imposed by a pair of spherical mirrors in a resonator configura-
tion. More generally, we demonstrate that Hermite—Gaussian beams are modes of the
spherical-mirror resonator. In the course of our analysis, we obtain expressions for the
resonance frequencies and spatial intensity distributions of the resonator modes.

11.2 SPHERICAL-MIRROR RESONATORS 451
Gaussian Beams
As discussed in Chapter 3, the Gaussian beam is a circularly symmetric wave whose
energy is confined about its axis (the z axis) and whose wavefront normals are paraxial
rays (Fig. 11.2-5). In accordance with (3.1-12), at an axial distance z from the beam
waist, the beam intensity I varies in the transverse x—y plane as the Gaussian distribu-
tion I = Ip[Wo/W(z)]* exp[—2(2? + y?)/W?(z)]. Its width is given by (3.1-8):
#2
W(z) = Wo /1+ (=) (11.2-8)
20
where Zo is the distance, known as the Rayleigh range, at which the beam wavefronts
are most curved. The beam width (radius) W(z) increases in both directions from
its minimum value Wo at the beam waist (z = 0). The radius of curvature of the
wavefronts, given by (3.1-9),
20 2
R(z) == 1+ (№) (11.2-9)
z
decreases from oo at z = 0, to a minimum value at z = 20, and thereafter grows
linearly with z for large z. For z > 0, the wave diverges and R(z) > 0; for z < 0,
the wave converges and R(z) < 0. The Rayleigh range 20 is related to the beam waist
radius Wo by (3.1-11):
ли
д = —2. (11.2-10)
А
The depth of focus is 220, 1.e., twice the Rayleigh range.
т т---Г- ЕТУ КИТ Веат
Het HH v=
Figure 11.2-5 Gaussian beam wavefronts (solid curves) and beam width (dashed curve).
The Gaussian Beam is a Mode of the Spherical-Mirror Resonator
A Gaussian beam reflected from a spherical mirror will retrace the incident beam if
the radius of curvature of its wavefront is the same as that of the mirror radius (see
Sec. 3.2C). Hence, if the radii of curvature of the wavefronts of a Gaussian beam, at
planes separated by a distance d, match the radii of two mirrors separated by the same
distance d, a beam incident on the first mirror will reflect and retrace itself to the
second mirror, where it once again will reflect and retrace itself back to the first mir-
ror, and so on. The beam can then exist self-consistently within that spherical-mirror
resonator, satisfying the Helmholtz equation and the boundary conditions imposed by
the mirrors. Provided that the phase also retraces itself, as discussed in Sec. 11.2C, the
Gaussian beam is then said to be a mode of the spherical-mirror resonator.
We now proceed to determine the Gaussian beam that matches a spherical-mirror
resonator, whose mirrors have radii of curvature А! and Р2 and are separated by the

452 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS

+ 4 ——_+|

Jae | eee]

51 0 22 Zz
Figure 11.2-6 Fitting a Gaussian beam to two mirrors separated by a distance d. Their radii of
curvature are А: and В2. Both mirrors are taken to be concave so that В! and Р2 are negative, as is
А.
distance d. The task is illustrated in Fig. 11.2-6 for the special case when both mirrors
are concave (Ry < 0 and Rz < 0).

The z axis is defined by the centers of the mirrors. The center of the beam, which is
yet to be determined, is assumed to be located at the origin z = 0; mirrors Ry and А2
are located at positions 21 and

2 = м +4, (11.2-11)
respectively. A negative value for 21 indicates that the center of the beam lies to the
right of mirror 1; a positive value indicates that it lies to the left. The values of 21 and
22 are determined by matching the radius of curvature of the beam, R(z) = z+ 2/2,
to the radii Ry, at 21 and Rg at 22. Careful attention must be paid to the signs. If both
mirrors are concave, they have negative radii. But the beam radius of curvature was
defined to be positive for z > 0 (at mirror 2) and negative for z < 0 (at mirror 1). We
therefore equate В! = В(21), but — В = R(z2), to obtain

Raat 2y/a (11.2-12)
— В = 24+ %/ 22. (11.2-13)
Solving (11.2-11), (11.2-12), and (11.2-13) for 21, 22, and 20 leads to
—d(R2+d)

— —_^, = а, 11.2-14
cal Ry +R, +24 #2 = м + ( )

—а(В + а)(В2 - а)(В> + В: +а
2 — ahi + (Re + 9+ Bi +) iF d)(Ra +4) 2+ itd) (11.2-15)

(Ro + Ry + 2d )
which accord with (3.1-27) and (3.1-28) Gf В2 is replaced with — R2).

Having determined the location of the beam center and the depth of focus 229, ev-
erything about the beam is known (see Sec. 3.1B). The waist radius is Wo = \/Az0/7,
and the beam radii at the mirrors are

=: \?
W; = Woy/1 + (=) ; $=1,2. (11.2-16)
20

In order that the solution (11.2-14)—(11.2-15) indeed represents а Gaussian beam,
20 must be real. An imaginary value of 2о would signify that the Gaussian beam is а
paraboloidal wave, which is an unconfined solution of the paraxial Helmholtz equation

11.2 SPHERICAL-MIRROR RESONATORS 453
(see Sec. 3.1A). Using (11.2-15), it is not difficult to show that the condition 2 > Ois
equivalent to
d d
0< [1+ — [1+ — | < 1. 11.2-17
(и) § unm
This is precisely the confinement condition derived from ray optics as set forth in
(11.2-5).
НИ
EXERCISE 11.2-2
А Plano-Concave Resonator. If mirror 1 is planar (В: = со), determine the confinement
condition and the depth of focus, as well as the beam width at the waist and at each of the mirrors, as
a function of d/|Ra|.
НИ
Gaussian Mode of a Symmetric Spherical-Mirror Resonator
The results provided in (11.2-11)-(11.2-15) simplify considerably for symmetric res-
onators with concave mirrors. Substituting Ry = R2 = —|R| into (11.2-14) provides
21 = —d/2 and 22 = d/2. The beam center thus lies at the center of the resonator, and
а /,|R|
= —1/2— -1, 11.2-18
% = 5 9 ( )
Ad [В]
Wo = 5/2 -1, 11.2-19
‘бт а ( )
Ad
w2—w2———_Ad/r (11.2-20)
V(d/|RI) [2 — (d/|R))|
The confinement condition (11.2-17) becomes
0< d <2 (11.2-21)
~ (RL |
Given a resonator of fixed mirror separation 4, we now examine the effect of in-
creasing mirror curvature on the beam radius at the waist Wo, and at the mirrors ИИ =
W,. (Increasing curvature corresponds to increasing d/|R| since the radius of curva-
ture diminishes as the curvature increases.) The results are illustrated in Fig. 11.2-7.
For a planar-mirror resonator, d/|R| = 0, so that Wo and W are infinite, correspond-
ing to a plane wave rather than a Gaussian beam. As d/|R| increases, Wo decreases
until it vanishes for the concentric resonator (d/|R| = 2); at this point ИЛ = W2 = co
and Wp = 0. In this limit, the resonator supports a spherical wave instead of a Gaussian
beam.
The width of the beam at the mirrors attains its minimum value, W, = И =
\/Ad/z, when d/|R| = 1, 1.е., for the symmetric confocal resonator. In this case
zo = d/2, (11.2-22)
Wo = мла/2т, (11.2-23)
W, = И = V2W. (11.2-24)

454 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
Beam
width
xa Figure 11.2-7 The beam width at the waist,
2 а Wo, and at the mirrors, W, = Wa, for a symmetric
spherical-mirror resonator with concave mirrors,
as a function of the ratio d/|R|. The planar-mirror
a resonator corresponds to d/|R| = 0. Symmetric
confocal and concentric resonators correspond to
d/|R| = 1 and d/|R| = 2, respectively.
0 1 чик 2?
The depth of focus 220 is then equal to the length of the resonator 4, as shown in
Fig. 11.2-8. This explains why the parameter 220 is sometimes called the confocal
parameter. A long resonator has a long depth of focus. The waist radius is proportional
to the square root of the mirror spacing. A Gaussian beam at Ло = 633 nm (a He-Ne
laser wavelength) in a resonator with d = 100 cm, for example, has a waist radius
Wo = \/Ла/2т = 0.32 mm, whereas a 25-cm-long resonator supports a Gaussian
beam with a waist radius that is half as big at the same wavelength: 0.16 mm. The
width of the beam at each of the mirrors is greater than it is at the waist by a factor of
V2.
Mirror 1 Mirror 2
т
V2Wy
<
о d= 24, ———_
Figure 11.2-8 Gaussian beam in a symmetric confocal resonator with concave mirrors. The depth
of focus 220 equals the length of the resonator d. The beam width at the mirrors is a factor of \/2
greater than that at the waist.
C. Resonance Frequencies
As indicated in Sec. 11.2B, a Gaussian beam is a mode of the spherical-mirror res-
onator provided that the wavefront normals reflect back onto themselves, always re-
tracing the same path, and that the phase retraces itself as well.
The phase of a Gaussian beam, in accordance with (3.1-23), is
(p,z) = kz —C(z) + kp” (11.2-25)
=) = Ех — С(2) + ——— .2-
where С(2) = $ап`"(2/20) and р? = x? + у?. At points on the optical axis (р = 0),
(0,2) = kz — С(2), so that the phase retardation relative to a plane wave is ¢(z). At
the locations of the mirrors, 21 and 22, we therefore have
(0, 21) = Ала — С(21), (11.2-26)
p(0, 22) = kzo — С(22). (11.2-27)

11.2 SPHERICAL-MIRROR RESONATORS 4955
Because the mirror surface coincides with the wavefronts, all points on each mirror
share the same phase. As the beam propagates from mirror | to mirror 2, its phase
changes by
(0, 22) — (0; 21) = (22 — 21) — [6(22) — ©(21)]
= Ка — ДС, (11.2-28)
where
AG = ¢ (22) — ¢(41)- (11.2-29)
As the traveling wave completes a round trip between the two mirrors, therefore, its
phase changes by 2kd — 2A¢.

In order that the beam truly retrace itself, the round-trip phase change must be
zero or a multiple of +27, 1.е., 2kd — 2AC = 27q, 4 = 0,41,+2,.... Using the
substitutions К = 27v/c and vp = c/2d, the frequencies 1, that satisfy this condition
are

A
Vg = дир + AC ИЕ. (11.2-30)
п Resonance Frequencies
Gaussian Modes
The frequency spacing of adjacent modes is therefore vp = c/2d, which is identical to
the result obtained in Sec. 11.1A for the planar-mirror resonator. For spherical-mirror
resonators, this frequency spacing is evidently independent of the curvatures of the
mirrors. The second term in (11.2-30), which does depend on the mirror curvatures,
simply represents a displacement of all resonance frequencies.
ee
EXERCISE 11.2-3
Resonance Frequencies of a Confocal Resonator. А symmetric confocal resonator has a
length d = 30 cm, and the medium has refractive index п, = 1. Determine the frequency spacing vr
and the displacement frequency (A¢/7) иг. Determine all resonance frequencies that lie within the
band 5 x 1014 +2 x 10° Hz.
ee
О. Hermite—Gaussian Modes
In Sec. 3.3 it was shown that the Gaussian beam is not the only beam-like solution
of the paraxial Helmholtz equation. The family of Hermite—Gaussian beams also рго-
vides solutions. Although a Hermite—Gaussian beam of order (1, т) has an amplitude
distribution that differs from that of the Gaussian beam, their wavefronts are identical.
As a result, the design of a resonator that “matches” a given beam (or the design of a
beam that “fits” a given resonator) is the same аз for the Gaussian beam, whatever the
values of (1, т). It follows that all members of the family of Hermite—Gaussian beams
represent modes of the spherical-mirror resonator.

The resonance frequencies of the (1, т) mode do, however, depend on the indices
(1,m). This is because of the dependence of the Gouy phase shift on / and т. As is
evident from (3.3-10), the phase of the (1, m) mode on the beam axis is

p(0, =) = kz —(l+m+1)¢(z). (11.2-31)

456 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
Again, the phase shift encountered by a traveling wave undergoing a single round trip
through a resonator of length d must be set equal to zero or an integer multiple of +27
in order that the beam retrace itself. Thus,
2kd — 2(1+ m+ ПАС = 274, q=0,+1,+2,..., (11.2-32)
where, as previously, AC = С(22) — С(21) and 21, z2 represent the positions of the two
mirrors. With k = 27v/c and vp = c/2d, this yields the resonance frequencies
AC
Vim = Wr + (lL +m-+ 1) — vp. (11.2-33)
п Resonance Frequencies
Hermite—Gaussian Modes
Modes of different а, but the same (I,m), have identical intensity distributions [see
(3.3-12)]. They are known as longitudinal or axial modes. The indices (1, т) label
different spatial dependencies on the transverse coordinates x, y; these therefore rep-
resent different transverse modes, as illustrated in Fig. 3.3-2.
Equation (11.2-33) dictates that the resonance frequencies of the Hermite—Gaussian
modes satisfy the following properties:
= Longitudinal modes corresponding to a given transverse mode have resonance
frequencies spaced by vp = с/24 since Ym.941 — Vmgq = ИР. This result is
the same as that obtained for the (0,0) Gaussian mode and for the planar-mirror
resonator.
= All transverse modes, for which the sum of the indices [ + m is the same, have
the same resonance frequencies.
= Two transverse modes (I,m), (Г, т’) corresponding to the same longitudinal
mode 4 have resonance frequencies spaced by
/ / AC
Yim. — Utym'g = [(1 + m) — (1 + т )] = VP. (11.2-34)
This expression determines the frequency shift between the sets of longitudinal
modes of indices (1, т) and (I’,m’).
НИ
EXERCISE 11.2-4
Resonance Frequencies of the Symmetric Confocal Resonator. Show that for a symmet-
ric confocal resonator, the longitudinal modes associated with different transverse modes are either
the same, or are displaced Бу v/2, as illustrated in Fig. 11.2-9.
KU p>
om | | | ttt
И Figure 11.2-9 In а symmetric confocal гез-
onator, the longitudinal modes associated with two
| | | | | | transverse modes of indices (1, т) and (I’,m’) are
(I',m') р V either aligned or displaced by half a longitudinal
| mode spacing.
1
— k- и
Ыв/2
НИ

11.2 SPHERICAL-MIRROR RESONATORS 4057
*E. Finite Apertures and Diffraction Loss

Since Gaussian and Hermite—Gaussian beams have infinite transverse extent whereas
the resonator mirrors are of finite extent, a portion of the optical power leaks around
the mirrors and escapes from the resonator on each pass. An estimate of the power loss
may be obtained by calculating the fractional power of the beam that is not intercepted
by the mirror. If the beam is Gaussian with width W and the mirror is circular with
radius a = 2W, for example, a small fraction, exp(—2a?/W7?) = 3.35 x 1074, of
the beam power escapes on each pass [see (3.1-17)], the remainder being reflected (or
transmitted through the mirror). Higher-order transverse modes suffer greater losses
since they have greater spatial extent in the transverse plane.

When the mirror radius a is smaller than 2W, the losses are greater. The resonator
modes are then less well described by Gaussian and Hermite—Gaussian beams. The
problem of determining the modes of a spherical-mirror resonator with finite-size
mirrors is difficult. A wave is a mode if it retraces its amplitude (to within a multi-
plicative constant) and reproduces its phase (to within an integer multiple of 27) after
completing a round trip through the resonator. One oft-used method for determining
the modes involves following a wave repeatedly as it bounces through the resonator,
thereby determining its amplitude and phase, much as we determined the position and
inclination of a ray bouncing within a resonator. After many round trips this process
converges to one of the modes.

The configuration for implementing this approach in a spherical-mirror resonator is
schematized in Fig. 11.2-10.

Mirror 1 Mirror 2
U> 1 Figure 11.2-10 Propagation of a wave through
a spherical-mirror resonator. The complex ampli-
—— 2a tude Uj; (x,y) corresponds to a mode if it repro-
Uy | duces itself after а round trip, 1.е., if 05(т,у) =
| d ИЛ (x,y) and ах {и} = 42т.
АА —ы

ТРО! (х, у) is the complex amplitude of a wave immediately to the right of mirror 1
in Fig. 11.2-10, and if U2(a, у) is the complex amplitude after one round trip of travel
through the resonator, then U;(x, у) is a mode provided that Uo(x, у) = wUi (т, у) and
provided that arg{j} is an integer multiple of 27 (1.е., м is real and positive). After
a single round trip, the mode intensity is attenuated by the factor ju”, and the phase
is reproduced. The methods of Fourier optics (Chapter 4) may be used to determine
U2(x,y) from U; (x,y). These quantities may be regarded as the output and input,
respectively, of a linear system (see Appendix B) characterized by an impulse response
function h(x, y; x’, y’), so that

Cc
Uo(x,y) = // h(x, y;2',y') Uy (2", у) da’ dy’. (11.2-35)
—oo
If the impulse response function h is known, the modes can be determined by
solving the eigenvalue problem described by the integral equation (see Appendix C)
ioe)
И] (тих, у) (т, у) ах dy! = иИ(х, у). (11.2-36)
—©

458 CHAPTER11 RESONATOR OPTICS

The solutions determine the eigenfunctions Uj (x,y), and the eigenvalues ит, la-
beled by the indices (1, т). The eigenfunctions are the modes and the eigenvalues are
the round-trip multiplicative factors. The squared magnitude |/1;,,,|7 is the round-trip
intensity reduction factor for the (1, т) mode. Clearly, when the mirrors are infinite
in size and the paraxial approximation is satisfied, the modes reduce to the family of
Hermite—Gaussian beams discussed earlier.

It remains to determine h(x, y; x’, у’) and to solve the integral equation (11.2-36).
A single pass inside the resonator involves traveling a distance d, truncation by the
mirror aperture, and reflection by the mirror. The remaining pass, needed to comprise
a single round trip, is similar. The impulse response function h(x, y; x’, у’) can then
be determined by applying the theory of Fresnel diffraction (Sec. 4.3B). In general,
however, the modes and their associated losses can be determined only by numerically
solving the integral equation (11.2-36). An iterative numerical solution begins with an
initial guess (Л, from which U2 is computed and passed through the system one more
round trip, and so on until the process converges.

This technique has been used to determine the losses associated with the various
modes of a spherical-mirror resonator with circular mirror apertures of radius a. The
results are illustrated in Fig. 11.2-11 for a symmetric confocal resonator. The loss is
governed by a single parameter, the Fresnel number Np = а? /Ла. This is because the
Fresnel number governs Fresnel diffraction between the two mirrors, as discussed in
Sec. 4.3B. For the symmetric confocal resonator described by (11.2-23) and (11.2-24),
the beam width at the mirrors is И’ = ,/Ad/z, so that Ad = пИ’2, from which
the Fresnel number is readily determined to be Nr = а?/лИ/?. Мк is therefore
proportional to the ratio a?/W?; a higher Fresnel number corresponds to a smaller
loss. From Fig. 11.2-11 we find that the loss per pass of the lowest-order symmetric-
confocal-resonator mode (1, т) = (0,0) is about 0.1% when Np = 0.94. This Fresnel
number corresponds to a/W = 1.72. If the beam were Gaussian with width W,
the percentage of power contained outside a circle of radius a = 1.72W would be
ехр(—2а? /И/?) = 0.27%. This is larger than the 0.1% loss per pass for the actual
resonator mode. Higher-order modes suffer from greater losses because of their greater
spatial extent.

ЕЕ
О О О О О О О И
р
г ГКЕЕМ ЕКЕЕ
d 2 8 FAP RENE
Хе
— ЕЕРЕЕУЕЕЕЕРЕЕЕЕЕЕЕ
es ee
РЕКЕ
oi LETT AE т |
0.5
Fresnel number Ng = a2/Ad
Figure 11.2-11 Percent diffraction loss per pass (half a round trip) as a function of the Fresnel
number Ne = a?/Ad for the (0,0), (1,0), and (2,0) modes in a symmetric confocal resonator.
(Adapted from A. E. Siegman, Lasers, University Science, 1986, Fig. 19.19 left.)

11.3 TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL RESONATORS 459
11.3 TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL RESONATORS
A. Two-Dimensional Rectangular Resonators
A two-dimensional (2D) planar-mirror resonator is constructed from two orthogonal
pairs of parallel mirrors, e.g., a pair normal to the z axis and another pair normal to the
y axis. Light is confined in the z—y plane by a sequence of ray reflections, as illustrated
in Fig. 11.3-1(@).
^^ XS
a Pe | р
=
| Se
ка
Figure 11.3-1 A two-dimensional planar-mirror resonator: (a) ray pattern; (6) standing-wave
pattern with mode numbers 4, = 3 and 4, = 2. The curves represent the modal amplitudes while the
brightness pattern depicts intensity.

The boundary conditions establish the resonator modes, much as for the one-
dimensional Fabry—Perot resonator. If the mirror spacing is d, then for standing waves
the components of the wavevector К = (ky, К.) are restricted to the values

п п
ky =, К№=94.-, 9=12,..., G@=1,2,..., (11.3-1)
а а
where 4, and 4. are mode numbers for the у and 2 directions, respectively. These
conditions are a generalization of (11.1-2). Each pair of integers (q,, 4») represents a
resonator mode U(r) x sin(q,7y/d) sin(q,7z/d), as illustrated in Fig. 11.3-1(6). The
lowest-order mode is (1,1) since the modes (q,,0) and (0, 4.) have zero amplitude,
i.e., U(r) = 0. Modes are conveniently represented by dots that indicate their values
of К, and К. оп а periodic lattice of spacing п/а (Fig. 11.3-2).
п
т... Е...
И
eeee еее |
= Figure 11.3-2 Dots denote the endpoints of the
О ee wavevectors К = (k,,k,) for modes in a two-
seers eet: dimensional resonator.
Г Я НЫ
0 kz

The wavenumber k of a mode is the distance of the dot from the origin. The associ-

ated frequency of the mode is и = ck/2z7. The frequencies of the resonator modes are

460  CHAPTER11 RESONATOR OPTICS
thus determined from
2 2 2 2ти\?
ke =k, +k, = — de (11.3-2)
so that
— 24 72 — _ £
Ка = VF Ч, +92, dys dz = 1,2,..., YF = 94° (11.3-3)
Resonance
Frequencies
The number of modes in a given frequency band, иг < и < 1, is established
by drawing two circles, of radii ky = 271 /с and ky = 27v2/c in the К diagram of

Fig. 11.3-2, and counting the number of dots that lie within the annulus. This procedure

converts the allowed values of the vector k into allowed values of the frequency v.

ee

EXERCISE 11.3-1

Density of Modes in a Two-Dimensional Resonator.

(a) Determine an approximate expression for the number of modes in a two-dimensional resonator
with frequencies lying between 0 and и, assuming that 2ли/с >> л/а, 1.е., d >> A/2, and
allowing for two orthogonal polarizations per mode.

(b) Show that the number of modes per unit area lying within the frequency interval between и and
v + dv is M(v)dv, where the density of modes M(v) (modes per unit area per unit frequency) at
frequency v is given by

4
M(v) =. (11.3-4)
с Density of Modes
(2D Resonator)
НИ
The resonator modes described thus far in this section are in-plane modes, traveling
in the plane of the 2D resonator (the y—z plane). Off-plane modes have a propagation
constant with a component in the orthogonal direction (the x direction). These are
guided modes traveling along the axis of a 2D waveguide such as that described in

Sec. 9.3. Whereas the К, and К. components of the wavevector take discrete values

dictated by the boundary conditions, the А. component takes continuous values since

the 2D resonator is open in the x direction.

B. Circular Resonators and Whispering-Gallery Modes

Light may be confined in a two-dimensional circular resonator by repeated reflections

from the circular boundary. As illustrated in Fig. 11.3-3, a ray that self-reproduces after

N reflections traces a path with round-trip pathlength Nd, where d = 2asin(7/N) and

ais the radius. For a traveling-wave mode, the resonance frequencies are determined by

equating the round-trip pathlength to an integer number of wavelengths, as in (11.1-7).

Ignoring the phase shift associated with each reflection, this leads to Nd = qA = qc/v,

1.е., to resonant frequencies и, = gc/Nd, where а = 1,2,.... The spacing between

these frequencies is therefore vp = c/Nd.

11.3 TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL RESONATORS 461
For N = 2, we have vp = c/2d = c/4a, which is identical to (11.1-5). Similarly,
N = 3 yields vp = c/3d = с/ЗУЗ a, which coincides with the result for the three-
mirror resonator (Exercise 11.1-1). In the limit N — со, the pathlength Nd approaches
the cylindrical circumference 27a and the corresponding spacing of the resonance
frequencies becomes
с
ив = ——. (11.3-5)
2та Spacing of Resonance Frequencies
The rays then hug the interior boundary of the resonator, reflecting at near-grazing
incidence, as illustrated in Fig. 11.3-3. Such optical modes are known as whispering-
gallery modes (WGM). The optical modes then behave similarly to acoustic modes in
the familiar acoustical whispering gallery, so-named because of the ease with which an
acoustic whisper can bounce along the convex surface of a church dome or gallery.
че в А Figure 11.3-3 Reflections in a
WN — __ circular resonator.
Mirror resonator Dielectric resonator
Two-dimensional resonators with other cross sections are also used. For example,
the circular cross section can be squeezed into a stadium-shaped structure. This oblong
configuration supports bow-tie modes [see Fig. 11.1-5(6)] in which the ray executes a
round-trip path comprising localized reflections from the four locations on the perime-
ter of the resonator that match the curvature of a conventional spherical-mirror confocal
resonator (see Sec. 11.2A).
C. Three-Dimensional Rectangular Resonators
A three-dimensional (3D) planar-mirror resonator is constructed from three pairs of
parallel mirrors forming the walls of a closed rectangular box of dimensions d, ,
d,, and d,. The structure is a three-dimensional resonator, as depicted in Fig. 11.3-
4(a). Standing-wave solutions within the resonator require that the components of the
wavevector К = (kz, ky, К.) are discretized to obey
п п 7
where 4», dy, and 4. are positive integers representing the respective mode numbers.
Each mode а, which is characterized by the three integers (q;, dy, 4-), is represented
by a dot in (k,, Ку, k,)-space. The spacing between these dots in a given direction is
inversely proportional to the width of the resonator along that direction. Figure 11.3-
4(b) illustrates the concept of the k-space for а cubic resonator with d,; = dy = 4. =
d.
The values of the wavenumbers k, and the corresponding resonance frequencies и,
satisfy
2 2 2 2 nv \*
ke =k, +k, НК, = ||. (11.3-7)
с

462 — СНАРТЕВ11 RESONATOR OPTICS
kz
_ 2nv
| Mode 2 ыы а _
Mode 1 <1 |e le |e
> РИС ИСИЯ
| ЕЕ ry
| +
| Нч = |
я
и VY НИ,
py я РЕЙ
/ d Ltt ee k
/ | У
„/ Mode 3 ри anna
/ VY Ee
а $
X
(a) (d)
Figure 11.3-4 (a) Waves in a three-dimensional cubic resonator (4, = 4, = 4. = 4). (b) The
endpoints of the wavevectors (k,, ky, К.) of the modes in а three-dimensional resonator are marked
by dots. The wavenumber k of a mode is the distance from the origin to the dot. Each point in k-space
occupies a volume (7/d)?. All modes of frequency smaller than и lie inside the positive octant of a
sphere of radius k = 27v/c.
The surface of constant frequency и is a sphere of radius k = 271/c. The resonance
frequencies are determined from (11.3-6) and (11.3-7):
Resonance
Frequencies
where
с с с
Ира = —— Иру = — Ир. = — 11.3-9
Fa od,’ Fy 24,’ Fz 2d, ( )
are frequency spacings that are inversely proportional to the resonator widths in the x,
y, and z direction, respectively. For resonators whose dimensions are much greater than
a wavelength, the frequency spacing is much smaller than the optical frequency. For
example, for d = 1 ст and n = 1, vp = 15 GHz. This is not so for microresonators,
however, as will be discussed in Sec. 11.4.
Density of Modes
When all dimensions of the resonator are much greater than a wavelength, the fre-
quency spacing ve = c/2d is small, and it is analytically difficult to enumerate the
modes. In this case, it is useful to resort to a continuous approximation and introduce
the concept of density of modes, the validity of which depends on the relative values
of the bandwidth of interest and the frequency interval between successive modes.
The number of modes lying in the frequency interval between 0 and v corresponds
to the number of points lying in the volume of the positive octant of a sphere of radius
k in the k diagram [Fig. 11.3-4(b)]. The number of modes in the positive octant of
a sphere of radius К is 2(3)($0k*)/(m/d)? = (k?/3n?)d°. The initial factor of 2
accounts for the two possible polarizations of each mode, whereas the denominator
(x/d)> represents the volume in k-space per point. It follows that the number of

11.4 MICRORESONATORS AND NANORESONATORS 463
modes with wavenumbers between АК and К + Ak, per unit volume, is o(k)Ak =
[(d/dk)(k? /3x?)| Ak = (Е? /п2) АК, so that the density of modes in k-space is o(k) =
К? /x?. Itis worthy of mention that this derivation is identical to that used for determin-
ing the density of allowed quantum states for electron waves confined within perfectly
reflecting walls in a bulk semiconductor [see Sec. 17.1C and (17.1-6)].

Since k = 2r7v/c, the number of modes lying between 0 and и is [(27v’/c)?/31?|d?
= (8rv3/3c3)d?. The number of modes in the incremental frequency interval ly-
ing between и and и + Ди is therefore given by (d/dv)[(87v3/3c3)d®|Av =
(8rv?/c3)d*® Av. The density of modes M(v), i.e., the number of modes per unit
volume of the resonator, per unit bandwidth surrounding the frequency и, is thus

2
M(v) = su (11.3-10)
с Density of Modes
(3D Resonator)

This formula was used by Rayleigh and Jeans in connection with the spectrum of
blackbody radiation (see Sec. 14.4B). The quantity M(v) is a quadratically increasing
function of frequency so that the number of modes within a fixed bandwidth Av
increases with the frequency v in the manner indicated in Fig. 11.3-5. As an example,
at v = 3x 10! (Л, = 1 pm), M(v) = 0.08 modes/cm*-Hz. Within a frequency band
of width 1 GHz, there are therefore 8 x 107 modes/ ст". The number of modes рег
unit volume within an arbitrary frequency interval иг < и < 1 is simply the integral
| M(v) dv.

1
Mv) v Figure 11.3-5 (a) The frequency

spacing between adjacent modes de-
creases as the frequency increases.
| (6) The density of modes M(v) for a
three-dimensional optical resonator is
a quadratically increasing function of
frequency.
и

The density of modes in two and three dimensions were derived on the basis of
square and cubic geometry, respectively. Nevertheless, the results are applicable for
arbitrary geometries, provided that the resonator dimensions are large in comparison
with the wavelength.

11.4 MICRORESONATORS AND NANORESONATORS
Microresonators are resonators in which one or more of the spatial dimensions as-
sumes the size of a few wavelengths of light or smaller. The term microcavity res-
onator, or microcavity for short, is usually reserved for a microresonator that has
small dimensions in all spatial directions, so that the modes exhibit large spacings
in all directions of k-space and the resonance frequencies are sparse. However, these
terms are often used interchangeably.

464 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS

The absence of resonance modes in extended spectral bands can inhibit the emission
of light from sources placed within a microcavity. At the same time, the emission of
light into particular modes of a high-Q, small-volume microcavity can be enhanced rel-
ative to emission into ordinary optical modes, as described in Sec. 14.3E. These effects
can be important in the operation of resonant-cavity light-emitting diodes (RCLEDs)
and microcavity lasers (see Secs. 18.1B and 18.5, respectively).

Microresonators can be fabricated using dielectric materials configured in various
geometries, such as (1) micropillars with Bragg-grating reflectors; (2) microdisks and
microspheres in which light reflects near the surface in whispering-gallery modes; (3)
microtoroids, which resemble small fiber rings; and (4) 2D photonic crystals containing
light-trapping defects that function as microcavities. These technologies embrace two
principal design objectives:

= The reduction of the modal volume V, the spatial integral of the optical energy

density $e &2 of the mode, normalized to the maximum energy density.

= The enhancement of the quality factor Q.

Spatial confinement is improved by fabricating microresonators with special geome-

tries, while enhancement of temporal confinement is realized by making use of low-

loss materials and low-leakage configurations. Typical modal volumes and quality

factors for these structures are summarized in Table 11.4-1.

Table 11.4-1 Normalized modal volume У/ЛЗ and quality factor О for various microresonators.
Micropillar Microdisk Microtoroid Microsphere Photonic-Crystal

У/Аз 5 5 103 103 1

Q 10° 104 108 1010 104

An exact analysis of the resonator modes of dielectric microresonators requires
the full electromagnetic theory. The Helmholtz equation is solved in a coordinate
system suitable for the geometry of the structure, and appropriate boundary conditions
are applied to the electric and magnetic fields at the planar, cylindrical, or spherical
boundaries. The solution yields the resonance frequencies of the modes and their spa-
tial distributions, which may be used to determine the modal volume for each mode.
Since the analysis is complex for all practical geometries, numerical solutions are often
necessary.

In the next section, we describe some of the properties of a simple rectangular (box)
microresonator whose walls are made of perfect mirrors. A simple analysis of the
modes of such a structure provides the resonance frequencies and the spatial distri-
butions of the modes. High-@ microresonators do not make use of mirrors because of
their relatively high losses, and the box structure is also not among the geometries
typically used in practical microresonators. Nevertheless, the analysis is useful for
elucidating the relation between the resonance frequencies and the dimensions of the
resonator, and for illustrating the frequency dependence of the density of modes for
boxes with different aspect ratios.

A. Rectangular Microresonators

The simplest microresonator structure is a rectangular (box) resonator made of planar
parallel mirrors. The modes are then sinusoidal standing waves in all three directions
and the resonance frequencies are given by (11.3-8). When the dimensions of the box
are small, only the lowest order modes lie within the optical band. For a cubic resonator,
the resonance frequencies are provided in Table 11.4-2 in units of yp = c/2d. As an

11.4 MICRORESONATORS AND NANORESONATORS 465
example, if d = 1 ит and the medium has refractive index п, = 1.5, we obtain vp =
100 THz. The frequencies of the lowest-order modes then correspond to the free-space
wavelengths A, = 2.13, 1.73, 1.34, 1.22, 1.06, 1.00, and 0.87um, which are widely
spaced.

Table 11.4-2 Resonance frequencies for the lowest-order modes of a cubic microcavity resonator.
Mode (4, dy dz) (011) (111) = (012) (112)® (022) (122)8) (222)
Frequency (units of vp) 1.41 1.73 2.24 2.45 2.83 3 3.46
*Superscripts in parentheses indicate the modal degeneracy, i.e., the number of modes of the same resonance
frequency. As an example, three modes have the same resonance frequency 1.41 ир: (011), (101), and (110).

If the resonator has a mixture of dimensions both small and large, as with a box
of large aspect ratio, the modes are placed at the points of an anisotropic grid in k-
space [see Fig. 11.3-4(b)]. The grid is finely divided along the directions of the large
dimensions and coarsely divided along the directions of the small dimensions. Mode
counting may then be implemented by use of a continuous approximation only in
those directions for which the grid is fine. The resultant modal density is displayed
in Fig. 11.4-1 for various cases.

< < <
а
АР + 0h,
У ) x я
р «Ре ^ aes
i d 2 4%
| | я |
0 ИЕ 2иЕ ЗиЕ и 0 ИЕ up ЗиЕ и 0 ИЕ 2иЕ ЗиЕ и
(а) (b) (с)
Figure 11.4-1 Modal density M(v) for rectangular microresonators with (a) one; (5) two; and
(с) three sides of small dimension ds < d. The frequency spacing associated with the small
dimension is ир = c/2dg. When all dimensions are small, as in (с), the resonance frequencies are
discrete and their values are those provided in Table 11.4-2 for the cubic microcavity resonator. The
result shown in (6) represents а combination of discrete modes associated with a 2D microresonator
and continuous modes associated with a 1D large resonator, which has a uniform modal density [see
(11.1-10)]. The result provided in (a) illustrates a combination of discrete modes associated with a 1D
microresonator and a continuum of modes associated with a 2D large resonator, which has a modal
density that is linearly proportional to frequency [see (11.3-4)].
B. Micropillars, Microdisks, and Microtoroids
Dielectric microresonators have been fabricated in a number of configurations, includ-
ing micropillars, microdisks, and microtoroids, as illustrated in Fig. 11.4-2. Light is
confined in these structures by total internal reflection (see Fig. 11.3-3).

466 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS

The micropillar, or micropost, resonator is a cylinder of high-refractive-index
material sandwiched between dielectric layers comprising distributed Bragg-grating
reflectors, as illustrated in Fig. 11.4-2(а). Light is confined in the axial direction by
reflection from the DBRs, as in a Fabry—Perot resonator; light is confined in the lateral
direction by total internal reflection from the walls of the cylinder. Micropillars are
typically fabricated from compound semiconductors via conventional lithographic and
etching processes; DBR layers are often made of AlAs/GaAs or AlGaAs/GaAs. The
pillar itself can contain an active region such as a multiquantum-well structure that
provides optical gain when pumped (Sec. 18.5A).

С
А — Silica
== Disk ae toroid
_ — ED sien
1: iar
=
——
(a) Micropillar (b) Microdisk (c) Microtoroid
Figure 11.4-2 Micropillar, microdisk, and microtoroid resonators.

The microdisk resonator displayed in Fig. 11.4-2(6) is a circular resonator in which
light travels at near-grazing incidence in whispering-gallery modes and is confined by
total internal reflection from the circular boundary (see Sec. 11.3B). Micropillar and
microdisk diameters usually range from 1 jm to tens of zm and their quality factors
Q are substantially larger than those of mirror resonators since their losses are sig-
nificantly lower (Table 11.4-1). Microdisk resonators fabricated from semiconductor
materials are widely used as microdisk lasers because of their many salutary features
(Sec. 18.5B).

The microtoroid dielectric microresonator illustrated in Fig. 11.4-2(с) is much like
a fiber-ring resonator, in which the resonator modes are circulating guided waves.
These microresonators are often fabricated from silica and are supported on a silicon
chip by a silicon pillar. The toroid is formed by surface tension while the material
is in a molten state; the outer boundary thus assumes a near atomic-scale surface
finish and has significantly lower scattering losses than the microdisk resonator. Silica
toroidal microresonators-on-a-chip exhibit exceptionally high values of the quality
factor, Q > 10° (Table 11.4-1).

C. Microspheres

Dielectric microspheres are used as three-dimensional optical microresonators. Cer-
tain modes are guided along trajectories (orbits) that are tightly confined near a great
circle of the sphere, resulting in whispering-gallery modes.

The modes of a dielectric sphere may be determined by solving the Helmholtz equa-
tion (5.3-16) for the electric and magnetic-field vectors, together with the appropriate
boundary conditions. These modes are similar to the wavefunctions of an electron in a
hydrogen atom (see Sec. 14.1A) because of the spherical symmetry of both problems,
but there are also differences in view of the vector nature of the electromagnetic field.

The electric and magnetic vector fields are directly related to a scalar potential func-
tion U that satisfies the Helmholtz equation.’ For a sphere of radius а and refractive

* For a detailed mathematical description, see, for example, A. N. Oraevsky, Whispering-Gallery Waves,
Kvantovaya Elektronika (Quantum Electronics), vol. 32, pp. 377—400, 2002.

11.4 MICRORESONATORS AND NANORESONATORS 467
index n, located in air, the separation-of-variables method in a spherical coordinate
system (г, 9, @) results in a solution of the form

U(r,0,0) < Vr Jpsi/2(nkor) Ри (cos@) exp(+jm¢), r<a, (114-1)

x VP Hp) /9(kor) Ри (cos 0) exp(+jm@), r>a, (11.4-2)

where J¢(-) is the Bessel function of the first kind of order 6, НО (.) is the Hankel

function of the first kind of order 6, Ре (.) is the adjoint Legendre function, and m and

£ are nonnegative integers. The boundary conditions at r = a yield a characteristic

equation that provides a discrete set of values for Ко, corresponding to the resonance

frequencies. These are indexed by a third integer n. In addition, there are two polari-
zation modes — ап Е mode for which Н,. = 0 and an H mode for which А, = 0.

The modes are generally oscillatory functions of r, 9, and ¢ characterized by the
radial, polar, and azimuthal mode numbers п, 6, and m, respectively. There are п
maxima in the radial direction within the sphere. The number of field maxima in the
azimuthal direction is 26, while the number of field maxima in the polar direction
(between the two poles) is 6 — m+ 1.

The fundamental mode (n = 1,m = @) has a single peak in the radial direction
within the sphere, and a single peak in the polar direction at 9 = 7/2. For large m = 6,
the modes are highly confined near the equator. This is because Pf(cos 0) = sin’ 0
vanishes rapidly at angles slightly different from 0 = 1/2, and Л(пКог) is small
everywhere within the sphere except for a sharp peak near r = a. The mode therefore
represents an optical beam traveling along the equator, as shown in Fig. 11.4-3(a),
much like the whispering-gallery modes of the disk resonator displayed in Fig. 11.3-3.
For sufficiently large @ = т, the resonance frequencies of these modes are approxi-
mately equal to vy = 6 с/2та. This is to be expected since the angular mode number 6
is close to the number of wavelengths that comprise the optical length of the equator.

The whispering-gallery mode may be viewed from a ray-optics perspective in terms
of quasi-plane waves with wavevectors parallel to the local rays (see Sec. 2.3 and
Fig. 10.2-8) that zigzag near the equator, as shown in Fig. 11.4-3(6). The wavevector
К has magnitude К = \/6(6 + 1)/a and azimuthal component ky = m/a. The incli-
nation angle of the zigzagging rays is smallest (© 1/\/@ ) for the fundamental mode
m = 6, while the m = 0 mode has a 90° inclination.

@) А, О
Figure 11.4-3 (а) Whispering-gallery mode in a microsphere resonator. (5) Ray model of the
whispering-gallery mode.

Microspheres fabricated from low-loss fused silica have been used as optical res-
onators with ultrahigh values of Q. Like the toroidal resonator depicted in Fig. 11.4-
2(c), the shape and surface finish of the sphere are determined by the surface tension in
the molten state during fabrication; the result is near atomic perfection in the surface
finish. The reduced surface scattering losses lead to remarkably high quality factors,

468 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
Q > 10!° (see Table 11.4-1). Optical power may be coupled into the sphere via an
optical fiber that is locally stripped of its cladding, as illustrated in Fig. 11.4-4.
Microsphere
a
; Figure 11.4-4 Coupling optical power from an
©). optical fiber into a microsphere resonator.
D. Photonic-Crystal Microcavities
As described in Chapter 7, photonic crystals are periodic dielectric structures exhibit-
ing photonic bandgaps, i.e., spectral bands within which light cannot propagate. The
Bragg grating reflector (BGR) is an example of a 1D photonic crystal that serves
as a reflector for frequencies within a photonic bandgap. The micropillar resonator
shown in Fig. 11.4-2(a), for example, uses BGRs in lieu of mirrors. If the height of the
microresonator equals one or just a few periods of the BGR, as illustrated in Fig. 11.4-
5(a), the structure may also be regarded as an extended photonic crystal with the cavity
acting as a defect in the crystal structure. The resonator is then called a photonic-
crystal resonator.

This concept is also applicable to 2D photonic crystals. As schematized in Fig. 11.4-
5(b), a defect in the 2D periodic crystal structure is a local alteration such as a missing
hole in a periodic array of air holes drilled in a slab. For wavelengths that fall within
the photonic-crystal bandgap, the periodic structure surrounding the defect does not
support light propagation, so that light is trapped within the defect, much like electrons
or holes are trapped by a defect in a semiconductor crystal. The defect then serves
as a microcavity resonator. Stated differently, the defect produces new resonance fre-
quencies that lie within the bandgap and correspond to optical modes that have spatial
distributions centered within the microcavity and that decay rapidly in the surrounding
photonic crystal.

Two-dimensional photonic crystals can be fabricated by using electron-beam lithog-
raphy and reactive ion etching in semiconductor materials. Microcavities of dimensions
close to a period of the photonic crystal, which can be of the order of a wavelength of
light, can support modal volumes as small аз АЗ. Hence, photonic-crystal microcavities
have the smallest normalized modal volumes of the family of microresonators (see
Table 11.4-1). The quality factors Q can be as high as 10*. Because of these features,
photonic-crystal resonators are often co-opted for use in photonic-crystal microcavity
lasers (Sec. 18.5C).

} Photonic
— crystal
Microcavity Boones
__— Microcavity Photonic _ РЕ 2225 <<
ЕЕ Е
(а) (Б)
Figure 11.4-5 Photonic-crystal microresonators. (a) The писгорШаг resonator аз a 1D photonic
crystal in which the microcavity acts as a defect. (b) A 2D photonic-crystal resonator may be
fabricated by drilling holes in a dielectric slab at the points of a planar hexagonal lattice; a missing
hole serves as the microcavity.

11.4 MICRORESONATORS AND NANORESONATORS 469
E. Plasmonic Resonators: Metallic Nanodisks and Nanospheres
Metallic electromagnetic resonators are routinely used at microwave and radio frequen-
cies. As illustrated in Fig. 11.0-2, microwave cavity resonators have dimensions that
are close to the resonance wavelength (cm), whereas radio-frequency resonant circuits,
comprising metallic capacitors and inductors, have dimensions (cm) much smaller than
the resonance wavelength (m).

Plasmonic resonators contain metallic structures of subwavelength dimensions that
operate at optical frequencies by supporting surface plasmon polariton (SPP) waves or
localized surface plasmon (LSP) oscillations at their boundaries with dielectric media
(Secs. 8.2B and 8.2C, respectively). They can take the form of nanodisks, nanospheres,
or other nanoparticles. Their dimensions (~10 nm) can be much smaller than the
resonance wavelength (-- ит), while maintaining а size-to-wavelength ratio (~10~7)
not unlike that of the radio-frequency electronic resonator portrayed in Fig. 11.0-2.

The mathematical modeling of structures whose dimensions are much larger than
the resonance wavelength, such as resonators with large mirrors, is readily achieved
by making use of electromagnetic optics. The electric and magnetic fields are then of
paramount importance, and these are the quantities that we customarily encounter in
the optics literature. At the opposite extreme, metallic structures whose dimensions are
much smaller than the resonance wavelength can be well-modeled in terms of electrical
voltages and currents. The key elements in this domain are lumped electrical compo-
nents such as inductors and capacitors, as encountered in the electrical-engineering
literature — as a simple example, the resonance frequency of the electronic resonator
portrayed in Fig. 11.0-2 is w) = 1/VLC. Metallic structures whose dimensions are
comparable to the resonance wavelength pose the greatest challenge in terms of mod-
eling because the analysis must then generally be carried out in terms of voltages and
currents as well as fields.

Metallic Nanodisk
A metallic cylinder with an interior dielectric material supports whispering-gallery
Photonic modes of light that reflect at the metallic boundary, as displayed in Fig. 11.4-
6(a). This disk resonator also supports plasmonic modes in the form of SPP waves
(Sec. 8.2B) at the interior boundary, as illustrated in Fig. 11.4-6(b). The internal op-
tical field of the plasmonic mode is more tightly confined near the boundary than is
the field of the photonic mode. Moreover, since the plasmonic wave penetrates more
deeply into the metal than does the photonic mode, it suffers greater losses and the
resonator exhibits a smaller quality factor ©. By comparison, a dielectric disk resonator
(Sec. 11.3B) supports whispering-gallery modes with evanescent optical fields that
extend into the exterior dielectric medium, as shown in Fig. 11.4-6(c).

$$ ="

Ne |

(a) (В) (с)
Figure 11.4-6 Schematic of optical-field distributions in disk resonators. (а) Photonic mode in а
metal—dielectric disk: light is confined to the interior by multiple reflections at the metallic boundary.
(b) Plasmonic mode in a metal—dielectric disk: a SPP wave travels along the interior boundary. (с)
Photonic mode in a dielectric—dielectric disk: light is confined by total internal reflection at the
boundary.

470 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
Nominal values for the normalized modal volume and quality factor of a plasmonic

mode in a metal-—dielectric disk resonator with a diameter of 100 nm are V/\? ~ 10-4

and Q ~ 10, respectively.’ These values are substantially below those for photonic-

crystal microcavities (see Table 11.4-1). Nevertheless, structures of this kind find use

in surface plasmon polariton disk and ring nanolasers (Sec. 18.6).

Metallic Nanosphere

As discussed in Sec. 8.2C, a metallic nanosphere embedded in a dielectric medium

supports resonant localized surface plasmon (LSP) oscillations. When the nanosphere

is illuminated by an optical wave, the scattered field, as well as the internal field,

are substantially enhanced at frequencies near resonance. This field enhancement is

accompanied by spatial localization of energy at the nanoscale, so that the nanosphere

serves as a nanoresonator. Since metals are relatively lossy, however, the resonator

quality factor С) is far lower than that of dielectric resonators. Nevertheless, a metal

nanosphere embedded in a specialized dielectric medium can serve as a localized

surface plasmon nanolaser (Sec. 18.6).

READING LIST

Books

See also the reading list on lasers in Chapter 16.

А. Н. W. Choi, ed., Handbook of Optical Microcavities, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2015.

J. Heebner, R. Grover, and T. A. Ibrahim, Optical Microresonators: Theory, Fabrication, and Appli-
cations, Springer-Verlag, 2008, paperback ed. 2010.

A. V. Kavokin, J. J. Baumberg, G. Malpuech, and F. P Laussy, Microcavities, Oxford University
Press, 2007.

D. G. Rabus, Integrated Ring Resonators: The Compendium, Springer-Verlag, 2007.

N. Hodgson and H. Weber, Laser Resonators and Beam Propagation: Fundamentals, Advanced
Concepts and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2005.

K. J. Vahala, ed., Optical Microcavities, World Scientific, 2004.

К. Stalitinas and У. J. Sanchez-Morcillo, Transverse Patterns in Nonlinear Optical Resonators,
Springer-Verlag, 2003.

А. М. Oraevsky, Gaussian Beams and Optical Resonators, Nova, 1996.

Yu. A. Anan’ev, Laser Resonators and the Beam Divergence Problem, CRC/Taylor & Francis, 1992.

J. М. Vaughan, The Fabry—Perot Interferometer, CRC Press, 1989.

С. Hernandez, Fabry-Perot Interferometers, Cambridge University Press, 1986, paperback ed. 1988.

A. E. Siegman, Lasers, University Science, 1986.

L. A. Vaynshteyn, Open Resonators and Open Waveguides, Golem Press, 1969.

Seminal Articles

K. J. Vahala, Optical Microcavities, Nature, vol. 424, pp. 839-846, 2003.

J. 9. Noéckel and А. О. Stone, Ray and Wave Chaos in Asymmetric Resonant Optical Cavities, Nature,
vol. 385, pp. 45-47, 1997.

H. Kogelnik and T. Li, Laser Beams and Resonators, Applied Optics, vol. 5, pp. 1550-1567, 1966
(published simultaneously in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 54, pp. 1312—1329, 1966).

А. Е. Siegman, Unstable Optical Resonators for Laser Applications, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 53,
рр. 277-287, 1965.

A. G. Fox and T. Li, Resonant Modes in a Maser Interferometer, Bell System Technical Journal,
vol. 40, pp. 453-488, 1961.

G. D. Boyd and J. P. Gordon, Confocal Multimode Resonator for Millimeter Through Optical Wave-
length Masers, Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 40, pp. 489-508, 1961.
1 See, e.g., М. Kuttge, Е. Javier Garcia de Abajo, and А. Polman, Ultrasmall Mode Volume Plasmonic

Nanodisk Resonators, Nano Letters, vol. 10, pp. 1537-1541, 2010.

PROBLEMS 471
PROBLEMS

11.1-3 Resonance Frequencies of a Resonator with an Etalon.

(a) Determine the spacing between adjacent resonance frequencies in a resonator con-
structed of two parallel planar mirrors separated by a distance d = 15 cm inair (п = 1).

(b) A transparent plate of thickness d; = 2.5 cm and refractive index п = 1.5 is placed
inside the resonator and is tilted slightly to prevent light reflected from the plate from
reaching the mirrors. Determine the spacing between the resonance frequencies of the
resonator.

11.1-4 Mirrorless Resonators. Laser diodes are often fabricated from crystals whose surfaces are
cleaved along crystal planes. These surfaces act as reflectors by virtue of Fresnel reflection,
and therefore serve as the mirrors of a Fabry—Perot resonator. An expression for the power
reflectance is provided in (6.2-15). Consider a crystal placed in air (n = 1) whose refractive
index п = 3.6 and loss coefficient a, = 1 cm~!. The light reflects between two parallel
surfaces separated by a distance d = 0.2 mm. Determine the spacing between resonance
frequencies vp, the overall distributed loss coefficient a,., the finesse F, the spectral width
of a mode ди, and the quality factor Q. If the free-space wavelength of the generated light
is Ло = 1.55 рт, estimate the longitudinal mode number 4.

11.1-5 Fabry-Perot Etalon with Bragg Grating Reflectors. A Fabry—Perot etalon is made by
sandwiching a layer of GaAs between two of the GaAs/AlAs Bragg grating reflectors
described in Prob. 7.1-8. Determine the finesse F of the resonator and quality factor ©.
Determine the transmittance of a Bragg grating reflector comprised of N = 10 alternating
layers of GaAs (п, = 3.6) and AlAs (ng = 3.2) of widths 41 and 4> equal to a quarter
wavelength in each medium. Assume that the light is incident from an extended GaAs
medium.

11.1-6 Optical Energy Decay Time. How much time does it take for the optical energy stored in
a resonator of finesse У = 100, length d = 50 cm, and refractive index n = 1, to decay to
one-half of its initial value?

11.2-5 Stability of Spherical-Mirror Resonators.

(a) Can a resonator with two convex mirrors ever be stable?
(b) Can a resonator with one convex and one concave mirror ever be stable?

11.2-6 A Planar-Mirror Resonator Containing a Lens. A lens of focal length f is placed inside
a planar-mirror resonator constructed of two flat mirrors separated by a distance d. The lens
is located at a distance d/2 from each of the mirrors.

(a) Determine the ray-transfer matrix for a ray that begins at one of the mirrors and travels
a round trip inside the resonator.

(b) Determine the condition of stability of the resonator.

(c) Under stable conditions sketch the Gaussian beam that fits this resonator.

11.2-7 Self-Reproducing Rays in a Symmetric Resonator. Consider a symmetric resonator using
two concave mirrors of radii В separated by a distance d = 3|R|/2. After how many round
trips through the resonator will a ray retrace its path?

11.2-8 Ray Position in Unstable Resonators. Show that for an unstable resonator the ray position
after m round trips is given Бу ут = ал" + agh}", where a; and a» are constants. Here
hy = b+ Vb? — 1, ho = b— Vb? — 1, and b = 2(1+d/R,)(1+ d/R2) — 1. Hint: Use the
results in Sec. 1.4D.

11.2-9 Ray Position in Unstable Symmetric Resonators. Verify that a symmetric resonator using
two concave mirrors of radii R = —30 cm separated by a distance d = 65 cm is unstable.
Find the position у: of a ray that begins at one of the mirrors, at position yo = 0 with an
angle 0) = 0.1°, and undergoes one round trip. If the mirrors have 5-cm-diameter apertures,
after how many round trips does the ray leave the resonator? Plot ут, т = 2,3,..., for
а = 50 cm and а = 65 cm. You may use the results of Prob. 11.2-8.

11.2-10 Gaussian-Beam Standing Waves. Consider a wave formed by the sum of two identical
Gaussian beams propagating in the +z and —z directions. Show that the result is a standing
wave. Using the boundary conditions at two ideal mirrors placed such that they coincide
with the wavefronts, derive the resonance frequencies (11.2-30).

472 CHAPTER 11 RESONATOR OPTICS
11.2-11 Gaussian Beam in a Symmetric Confocal Resonator. A symmetric confocal resonator
with mirror spacing d = 16 cm, mirror reflectances 0.995, and n = 1 is used in a laser
operating at Л. = 1 им.
(a) Find the radii of curvature of the mirrors.
(b) Find the waist of the (0,0) (Gaussian) mode.
(c) Sketch the intensity distribution of the (1,0) modes at one of the mirrors and determine
the distance between its two peaks.
(4) Determine the resonance frequencies of the (0,0) and (1,0) modes.
(e) Assuming that losses arise only from imperfect mirror reflectances, determine the dis-
tributed resonator loss coefficient а...
*11.2-12 Diffraction Loss in a Symmetric Confocal Resonator. The percent diffraction loss per
pass for the different low-order modes of a symmetric confocal resonator is given in
Fig. 11.2-11, as a function of the Fresnel number Np = a? /Ad (where d is the mirror
spacing and a is the radius of the mirror aperture). Using the parameters provided in
Prob. 11.2-11, determine the mirror radius for which the loss per pass of the (1,0) mode is
1%.
11.3-2 Number of Modes in Resonators of Different Dimensions. Consider light of wavelength
Ао = 1.06 wm and spectral width Av = 120 GHz. How many modes have frequencies
within this linewidth in the following resonators (n = 1):
(a) A one-dimensional resonator of length d = 10 cm?
(b) A 10cm x 10 cm two-dimensional resonator?
(с) А 10 cm x 10 cm x 10 cm three-dimensional resonator?

CHAPTER
ee
STATISTICAL OPTICS
12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOM LIGHT 475

A. Optical Intensity
B. Temporal Coherence and Spectrum
C. Spatial Coherence
D. Longitudinal Coherence
12.2 INTERFERENCE OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 489
A. Interference of Two Partially Coherent Waves
B. Interferometry and Temporal Coherence
C. Interferometry and Spatial Coherence
*12.3 TRANSMISSION OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 497
A. Propagation of Partially Coherent Light
B. Image Formation with Incoherent Light
C. Gain of Spatial Coherence by Propagation
12.4 PARTIAL POLARIZATION 506
a
Max Born (1882-1970) Emil Wolf (1922-2018)
The book Principles of Optics, first published in 1959 by Max Born and Emil Wolf, drew attention
to the importance of coherence in optics. Emil Wolf is responsible for many advances in the theory
of optical coherence.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
473

CSC
Statistical optics is the study of the properties of random light. Randomness in
light arises because of unpredictable fluctuations in the source of light itself or in the
medium through which it propagates. Natural light, such as that radiated by a hot object
(e.g., the sun) is random in time because it comprises a superposition of emissions from
a very large number of atoms that radiate independently, and with different frequencies
and phases. Randomness in light can also arise as a result of scattering from a rough
surface, or transmission through a ground-glass diffuser or a turbulent fluid, which
impart random spatial variations to the optical wavefront. The study of the random
fluctuations of light is also known as the theory of optical coherence.

In earlier chapters it was assumed that light is deterministic or “coherent.” As dis-
cussed in Sec. 2.2, an example of coherent light is the monochromatic wavefunction
u(r,t) = Re{U(r) exp(j2avt)}, for which the complex amplitude U(r) is a deter-
ministic complex function, e.g., U(r) = (Ao/r) exp(—jkr) for a spherical wave.
The dependence of the wavefunction on time and position is then perfectly periodic
and predictable [Fig. 12.0-1(a)]. For random light, in contrast, the dependence of the
wavefunction on time and position is not totally predictable and generally requires
statistical methods for its characterization [Fig. 12.0-1(6)].

Time
dependence t t
x x
Wavefronts §& |
< <
(а) (b)
Figure 12.0-1 Time dependence and wavefronts of (a) a monochromatic spherical wave, which is
an example of coherent light; (6) random light.

How can we go about extracting meaningful measures from the fluctuations of a
random optical wave that will permit us to characterize it and distinguish it from other
random waves? Examine, for instance, the three random optical waves displayed in
Fig. 12.0-2, whose wavefunctions at some position vary with time as shown. A good
beginning is to observe that wave (b) is more “intense” than wave (a), and that the
envelope of wave (c) fluctuates “faster” than the envelopes of the other two waves.

М и a И и RH А и Mt ;
(a) ©) ()
Figure 12.0-2 Time dependence of the wavefunctions of three random waves.
474

12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOM LIGHT 475

To translate these casual qualitative observations into quantitative measures, we use
the concept of statistical averaging to define a number of (nonrandom) measures of a
wave. Because the random function u(r, t) satisfies certain laws (the wave equation and
boundary conditions) its statistical averages must also satisfy certain laws. The theory
of optical coherence is concerned with the definitions of these statistical averages,
the laws that govern them, and the measures by means of which light is classified
as coherent, incoherent, or, in general, partially coherent.

This Chapter

This chapter serves as an introduction to the theory of optical coherence. Familiarity
with the theory of random fields (random functions of many variables — space and
time) is useful for fully understanding the theory of partial coherence. However, the
notions presented in this chapter are limited in scope, so that knowledge of the concept
of statistical averaging suffices.

In Sec. 12.1 we define two statistical averages used to describe random light: the
optical intensity and the mutual coherence function. Temporal and spatial coherence
are delineated, and the connection between temporal coherence and monochromaticity
is established. The examples of partially coherent light provided in Sec. 12.1 reveal that
spatially coherent light need not be temporally coherent, and that monochromatic light
need not be spatially coherent. One of the basic manifestations of the coherence of light
is its ability to produce visible interference fringes. Section 12.2 is devoted to the laws
of interference obeyed by random light. The propagation of partially coherent light
in free space, and its transmission through various optical systems (including image-
formation systems) is the subject of Sec. 12.3. The theory of polarization of random
light (partial polarization), which relies on statistical averaging of the components of
the optical field vector, is introduced in Sec. 12.4. With the exception of this latter
section, our exposition is framed in the context of scalar wave optics.

12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOM LIGHT

An arbitrary optical wave is described by a wavefunction u(r,t) = Re{U(r,t)},
where U(r, $) is the complex wavefunction. For example, U(r,t) may take the form
U(r) exp(j27vt) for monochromatic light, or it may comprise а sum of such functions
with many different values of и for polychromatic light (see Sec. 2.6A for a discussion
of the complex wavefunction). For random light, both functions, u(r,t) and U(r, t),
are random and are characterized by a number of statistical averages that are introduced
in this section.
A. Optical Intensity
As discussed in Secs. 2.2A and 2.6A, the intensity I(r, t) of coherent (deterministic)
light is related to the absolute square of the complex wavefunction U(r, $) via

Це, = |U(r,#)|?. (12.1-1)
For pulsed light, the intensity is time varying whereas for monochromatic deterministic
light it is independent of time.

For random light, U(r,t) is a random function of time and position. The intensity
|U(r, t)|? is therefore also random. The average intensity is then defined as

I(r,t) = (U(r, 4)|?), (12.1-2)
Average Intensity

476 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS

where the symbol (-) denotes an ensemble average over many realizations of the ran-
dom function. Thus, although a random wave that is repeatedly reproduced under the
same conditions leads to a different wavefunction on each trial, the average intensity at
each time and position is determined by making use of (12.1-2). We denote I(r, t) the
intensity of the light (with the modifier average implied), when there is no ambiguity
in meaning. The unaveraged quantity |U(r,t)|?, in contrast, is called the random
intensity or instantaneous intensity. For deterministic light, the averaging operation
is superfluous since all trials produce exactly the same wavefunction, whereupon (12.1-
2) is equivalent to (12.1-1).

The average intensity may be time independent or it may be a function of time, as
illustrated in Figs. 12.1-1(a) and (5), respectively. The former case applies when the
optical wave is statistically stationary, 1.е., when its statistical averages are invariant
to time. The instantaneous intensity |U(r, t)|? then fluctuates randomly with time, but
its average is constant. We denote the average intensity in this case by I(r). It is clear
that stationarity does not necessarily mean constancy; rather it signifies constancy of
the average properties. An example of stationary random light is that emitted by an
ordinary incandescent lamp whose filament is heated by a constant electric current.
The average intensity Г(г) is then a function of distance from the lamp, but it does not
vary with time. On the other hand, the random intensity | (г, t)|? fluctuates with both
position and time, as illustrated in Fig. 12.1-1(а).
|Осг, ОР |0, ОР |

t t

I(r, 2) | I(r, t) |

t t
(a) Stationary (b) Nonstationary
Figure 12.1-1 (qa) A statistically stationary wave has an average intensity Г(г) that does not vary
with time. (6) A statistically nonstationary wave has an average intensity Г(г, t) that varies with time.
These plots represent, for example, the intensity of light produced by an incandescent lamp driven by
(a) а constant electric current, and (5) a pulse of electric current.

When the light is stationary, the statistical averaging operation over many realiza-
tions of the wave, as prescribed by (12.1-2), is usually equivalent to time averaging
over a long time duration, which is written as

I lim — р t)|? dt 12.1-3
(r) = Jim se [| бе. (121-3)
B. Temporal Coherence and Spectrum
Consider the fluctuations of stationary light at a fixed position r, as a function of time.
The stationary random function U(r, t) has a constant intensity I(r) = (|U(r, t)|?).
For brevity, we need not explicitly indicate the r dependence since r is fixed, so that
we may write U(r, t) = U(t) and I(r) = Г.

The random fluctuations of U(t) are characterized by a time scale representing the

“memory” of the random function. After this time, the process “forgets” itself, so that

12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOM LIGHT 477
fluctuations at points separated by a time interval longer than this memory time are
independent. The function appears to be relatively smooth within its memory time, but
“rough” or “erratic” when examined over longer time scales as portrayed in Fig. 12.0-2.
A quantitative measure of this temporal behavior is established by defining a statistical
average called the autocorrelation function. This function describes the extent to which
the wavefunction fluctuates in unison at two instants of time separated by a given time
delay, and thus serves to establish the time scale of the process that characterizes the
wavefunction.

Temporal Coherence Function
The autocorrelation function of a stationary complex random function U (t) is defined
as the average of the product of U*(t) and U(t +r), as a function of the time delay т,
G(r) = (U*(t) U(t+7)) (12.1-4)
Temporal Coherence Function
or
1 т
G(r) = lim ot | U*(t)U(t +7) dt (12.1-5)
T- 00 2 T —T
(see Sec. А.1 in Appendix A).

To understand the significance of the definition in (12.1-4), consider the case in
which the average value of the complex wavefunction (U(t)) = 0. This is applicable
when the phase of the phasor U(t) is equally likely to have any value between 0 and
27, as illustrated in Fig. 12.1-2. The phase of the product U*(t)U(t + т) is the angle
between phasors U(t) and U(t +7). If these two quantities are uncorrelated, the angle
between their phasors varies randomly between 0 and 27. The phasor U*(t)U(t + 7)
then has a totally uncertain angle, so that it is equally likely to take any direction,
making its average, the autocorrelation function G(r), vanish. On the other hand if,
for a given value of 7, U(t) and U(t + т) are correlated, their phasors will maintain
some relationship. Their fluctuations are then linked together so that the product phasor
U*(t)U(t + т) will have a preferred direction and its average G(7) will not vanish.

Im{U(}
Figure 12.1-2 Variation of the phasor U(t)
with time when its argument is uniformly dis-
tributed between О and 27. The average values
Ret UO} of its real and imaginary parts are zero, so that
(U(t)) =0.

In the language of optical coherence theory, the autocorrelation function G(r) is
known as the temporal coherence function. It is easy to show that G(r) is a function
with Hermitian symmetry, G(—7T) = G*(r), and that the intensity Г, defined by (12.1-
2), is equal to С'(т) when r = 0:

I= G(0). (12.1-6)

478 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
Degree of Temporal Coherence
The temporal coherence function G(r) carries information about both the intensity
I = G(0) and the degree of correlation (coherence) of stationary light. A measure of
coherence that is insensitive to the intensity is provided by the normalized autocorre-
lation function,
G(r) _ (U*()U(E +7)
о) WOU) | sores o
Complex Degree of
Temporal Coherence
which is called the complex degree of temporal coherence. Its absolute value cannot
exceed unity,
0 <|9(r)| <1. (12.1-8)
The value of |9(т)| is a measure of the degree of correlation between U(t) and
U(t + т). When the light is deterministic and monochromatic, i.e., when U(t) =
Ao exp(j27Vpt) where Ад is a constant, (12.1-7) yields
9(т) = exp(j2717), (12.1-9)
so that |9(т)| = 1 for all 7. The variables U(t) and U(t + т) are then completely
correlated for all time delays т. For most sources of light, |g(7)| decreases from its
maximum value |g(0)| = 1 as 7 increases, and the fluctuations become uncorrelated
for sufficiently large т.
Coherence Time
If |9(т)| decreases monotonically with time delay, the value 7, at which it drops to a
prescribed value (1/2 or 1/e, for example) serves as a measure of the memory time of
the fluctuations. The quantity 7. is known as the coherence time (see Fig. 12.1-3).
u(t) Те A lg(7)| u(t) А Te | Ig(7)|
1 1
ААА ОА — |, АА А —
0 T 0 T
(a) (b)
Figure 12.1-3 Illustrations of the wavefunction, magnitude of the complex degree of temporal
coherence |9(т)|, and coherence time т. for an optical field with (a) short coherence time and
(b) long coherence time. The amplitudes and phases of the wavefunctions vary randomly with time
constants approximately equal to т. (which is greater than the duration of an optical cycle). Within
the coherence time, the wave is rather predictable and can be approximated by a sinusoid. However,
given the amplitude and phase of the wave at a particular time, the amplitude and phase at times
beyond the coherence time cannot be predicted.
For tT < т. the fluctuations are “strongly” correlated whereas for т > те they are
“weakly” correlated. In general, те is the width of the function |g(7)|. Although the

12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOM LIGHT 479
definition of the width of a function can take many forms (see Sec. A.2 of Appendix A),
the power-equivalent width is commonly used as the definition of coherence time:
Co
Te -| 19(т) |? dr (12.1-10)
—© Coherence Time
[see (A.2-8) and note that 9(0) = 1].
НИ
EXERCISE 12.1-1
Coherence Time. Verify that the following expressions for the complex degree of temporal
coherence are consistent with the definition of 7. given in (12.1-10):
exp (- |) (exponential)
Те
9(т) = (12.1-11)
пт? .
exp (-$5) . (Gaussian)
Ву what factor does |9(т)| drop as т increases from 0 to 7, in each case?
ee
The coherence time of monochromatic light is infinite since |9(т)| = 1 everywhere.
Light for which the coherence time 7, is much longer than differences of the time
delays encountered in an optical system of interest is effectively completely coherent.
Thus, light is effectively coherent if the distance сте is much greater than all optical
pathlength differences encountered. This distance is known as the coherence length:
le = сте (12.1-12)
Coherence Length
Power Spectral Density
To determine the average spectrum of random light, we carry out a Fourier decompo-
sition of the random function U(t). The amplitude of the component with frequency v
is the Fourier transform (see Appendix A)
Co
V(v) = ] U(t) exp(—j2nvt) dt. (12.1-13)
—со
The average energy рег unit area of those components with frequencies in the interval
between и and v + dv is (|V(v)|?) dv, so that (|V(v)|”) represents the energy spectral
density of the light (energy per unit area per unit frequency). Note that the complex
wave function U(t) has been defined so that У (и) = 0 for negative и (see Sec. 2.6А).
Since a truly stationary function U(t) is eternal and carries infinite energy, we
consider instead the power spectral density. We first determine the energy spectral
density of the function U(t) observed over a window of time width T by finding the
truncated Fourier transform
T/2
Vr(v) = ] U(t) exp(—j2mvt) dt (12.1-14)
—Т/2

480 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
and we then determine the energy spectral density (|Vr(v)|?). The power spectral
density is the energy per unit time (1/7)(|Vr(v)|?). We can now extend the time
window to infinity by taking the limit T —> oo, which yields the power spectral
density:
. 1 2
S(v) = lim =(|Vr(v)|*); (12.1-15)
То Г
S(v) is nonzero only for positive frequencies. Because U(t) was defined such that
|U(t)|? represents power per unit area, or intensity (W/cm?), S(v) dv represents the
average power per unit area carried by frequencies between v and и + dy, so that S(v)
actually represents the intensity spectral density (W/cm?-Hz). It is often referred to
simply as the spectral density or the spectrum. The total average intensity is the
integral
CO
l= ] S(v) dv. (12.1-16)
0

The autocorrelation function G(r), defined by (12.1-4), and the spectral density
S(v) defined by (12.1-15) can be shown to form a Fourier transform pair (see
Prob. 12.1-5),

co
S(v) = ] G(r) ехр(—72пит) dr. (12.1-17)
—o0 Power Spectral Density
This relation is known as the Wiener—Khinchin theorem.

An optical wave representing a color image, such as that illustrated in Fig. 12.1-4,
has a spectrum that varies with position r; each spectral profile shown corresponds to
a perceived color.

Е
3 Green
3 Red >
400 500 600 700 =
Wavelength (nm) Е
2 3
Е [\ а
3 Blue 400 500 600 700
3 Wavelength (nm)
8
400 500 600 700
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 12.1-4 Spectral densities, plotted as a function of wavelength, at three locations in a color
image (Georgia O’ Keeffe, Red Canna, 1919, High Museum of Art, Atlanta).

12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOM LIGHT 481
Spectral Width
The spectrum of light is often confined to a narrow band centered about a central
frequency 1. The spectral width, or linewidth, of light is the width Av of the spectral
density $(и). Because of the Fourier-transform relation between S(v) and G(r), their
widths are inversely related. As illustrated in Fig. 12.1-5, a light source of broad
spectral width has a short coherence time, whereas a light source of narrow spectral
width has a long coherence time. In the limiting case of monochromatic light, G(7) =
I exp(j27vT), so that the corresponding intensity spectral density S(v) = Id(v — 1)
contains only a single frequency component о, in which case т. = со and Ди = 0.
The coherence time of a source of light can be increased by passing it through an
optical filter to reduce its spectral width. The resultant gain of coherence comes at the
expense of a reduction of its intensity.
u(t) ея Но ый $(и
ДА — | —
HUNCH PHT “ 7
0 т 0 м и
u(t) те С sw
5 ATTA АНН ААЦ || le. —_
(0) mT ИРИ ; Тс Av
0 т 0 м и
Figure 12.1-5 Two random waves together with the magnitudes of their complex degree of
temporal coherence and their spectral densities. The widths of S(v) and |9(т)| are inversely related.
There are several definitions for spectral width (see Appendix A, Sec. A.2). The
most common is the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the function S(v), which
we denote Avpwiny, = Av. The relation between Арины and the coherence time то
depends on the spectral profile of the source, as indicated in Table 12.1-1.
Table 12.1-1 Relation between spectral width Avgwy and coherence time т. for light with
several different spectral profiles.
Spectral Profile Rectangular Lorentzian Gaussian
1 1 32 \/21n2 .
Spectral Width Avpwum — — = 9.32 y2in2/r /т А 0.66
Te Те Те Те Те
An alternative convenient definition of the spectral width is
со 2
( ] S(v) av)
Avy, = и. (12.1-18)
] S*(v) dv
0

482 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
Using the definition provided in (12.1-18) it can be shown that
1
Ди. = —, (12.1-19)
Te Spectral Width
regardless of the spectral profile (see Exercise 12.1-2). As an example, if S(v) is a
rectangular function extending over a frequency interval from vp — B/2 to 1+ B/2,
then (12.1-18) yields Ди. = В. For this profile, the coherence time т. = 1/B, so that
(12.1-19) is obeyed. The two definitions of bandwidth, Av, and Avpwau, differ by a
factor that ranges from 0.32 to 1 for the spectral profiles presented in Table 12.1-1.
ee
EXERCISE 12.1-2
Relation Between Spectral Width and Coherence Time. Show that the coherence time то
defined in (12.1-10) is related to the spectral width Av, defined in (12.1-18) by the simple inverse
relation т. = 1/Av,. Hint: Use the definitions of Av, and т., the Fourier-transform relation between
S(v) and G(r), and Parseval’s theorem provided in (A.1-7) [Appendix A].
ee
Representative spectral widths for several different sources of light, along with their
associated coherence times and coherence lengths, are provided in Table 12.1-2.
Table 12.1-2 Spectral widths Av, for various sources of light together with their coherence times
тс and coherence lengths in free space [. = соте.
Source Av, (Hz) те =1/AYy, [= CoTe
Filtered sunlight (A, = 0.4-0.8 um) 3.74 x 10!4 2.67 fs 800 nm
Light-emitting diode (A, = 1 um, AA, = 50 nm) 1.5 x 103 67 fs 20 wm
Low-pressure sodium lamp 5 x 101 2 ps 600 ит
Multimode He-Ne laser (A, = 633 nm) 1.5 x 10° 0.67 ns 20 cm
Single-mode He-Ne laser (Л. = 633 nm) 1х 10° 1 13 300 т
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 12.1-1. А Wave Comprising a Random Sequence of Wavepackets. Light
emitted from an incoherent source may be modeled as a sequence of wavepackets emitted at random
times (Fig. 12.1-6)." Each wavepacket is taken to have a random phase since it is emitted by a different
atom.
u(t) g(7)|
| | | | | | | | | Ц | |.
И
Figure 12.1-6 Light comprising wavepackets emitted at random times has а coherence time equal
to the duration of a wavepacket.
1 Зее В. Е. А. Saleh, D. Stoler, and М. С. Teich, Coherence and Photon Statistics for Optical Fields Generated
by Poisson Random Emissions, Physical Review A, vol. 27, pp. 360-374, 1983.

12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOMLIGHT 483
The individual wavepackets may be sinusoidal with an exponentially decaying envelope, for example,
so that at a given position a wavepacket emitted at $ = 0 has a complex wavefunction given by
A t 210), #20
U,(t) = 4 РГ. exp(j2mVot), t > (12.1-20)
0, t <0.
The emission times are totally random, and the random independent phases of the different emissions
are included in A,. The statistical properties of the total field may be determined by perform-
ing the necessary averaging operations using the rules of mathematical statistics. The result is a
complex degree of coherence given by g(r) = exp(—|r|/7.) ехр(72пмот), whose magnitude is а
double-sided exponential function. The corresponding power spectral density is Lorentzian, S(v) =
(Av /2)/[(v — vo)? + (Av/2)?], where Av = 1/7, (see Table А.1-1 in Appendix A). The
coherence time 7, in this case turns out to be exactly the width of a wavepacket. The statement
that this light is correlated within the coherence time therefore signifies that it is correlated within the
duration of an individual wavepacket.
«И
С. Spatial Coherence
Mutual Coherence Function
An important descriptor of the spatial and temporal fluctuations of the random function
U(r, t) is the cross-correlation function of U(r, t) and U (re, t) at pairs of positions
г! andro:
Mutual Coherence Function
This function of the two positions and the time delay 7 is known as the mutual co-
herence function. Its normalized form is known as the complex degree of coherence:
G(r1, 12,7
g(¥1,%2,7) = GOTT) (12.1-22)
V1 (x1) 2 (x2) Complex Degree of Coherence
When the two points coincide so that r; = го = r, (12.1-21) and (12.1-22) reproduce
the temporal coherence function and the complex degree of temporal coherence at the
position г, as provided in (12.1-4) and (12.1-7), respectively. When т = 0 as well,
we recover the intensity I(r) = G(r,r,0) at the position г. The analogous cross-
correlation functions in the guantum theory of optical coherence are defined in terms of
operators rather than fields and the averages are carried out with respect to the quantum
state of the light, in accordance with the precepts of quantum optics (Sec. 13.3).

The complex degree of coherence g(rj,r2,7) is the cross-correlation coefficient
of the random variables U*(r1,t) and U(r2,t + 7). As with the complex degree of
temporal coherence [see (12.1-8)], its absolute value is bounded between zero and
unity:

0 < 9(г1,г2,т)| < 1. (12.1-23)
This quantity is therefore considered a measure of the degree of correlation between
the fluctuations at г! and those at г2 at a time т later.

484 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS

When the two phasors U(r,t) and U(re,t) fluctuate independently and their
phases are totally random (each having a phase that is equally probable between 0
and 27), |9(г1,го,т)| = 0 since the average of the product U*(ri,t) U(re,t + т)
vanishes. The light fluctuations at the two points are then uncorrelated. The other limit,
[9(гл, га, т)| = 1, obtains when the light fluctuations at r;, and at го a time т later, are
fully correlated. Note that |g(r1, г2, 0)| is not necessarily unity; however, by definition
[9(г,г,0)| = 1. — ,

The dependence of 9(г1, го, т) on the positions and on the time delay character-
izes the spatial and temporal coherence of light. Two examples of the dependence of
|g(r1, га, т)| on the distance |r; —r2| and on the time delay т are illustrated in Fig. 12.1-
7. The temporal and spatial fluctuations of light are interrelated since light propagates
in waves and the complex wavefunction U(r,t) must satisfy the wave equation. This
imposes certain conditions on the mutual coherence function (see Exercise 12.1-3). To
illustrate this point, consider, for example, a plane wave of random light traveling in the
z direction at velocity c in a homogeneous and nondispersive medium. Fluctuations at
the points г: = (0,0, 21) and г2 = (0,0, z2) are completely correlated when the time
delay is т = то = |22 — 21|/c, whereupon |g(r1, r2, 7)| = 1. Considered as a function
of 7, |g(t1,1%2,7)| then has its maximum value at 7 = то, as illustrated in Fig. 12.1-
7(b). This example will be revisited in Sec. 12.1D.

lg(r1, Г2,т)] 191, F2,7)|
=> Vy
T T №
(а) (5)
Figure 12.1-7 Two examples of |g(r1, г2, т)| аз a function of the separation |r; — г2| and the time
delay т. In (a) the maximum correlation for a given |r; — г2| occurs at T = 0, whereas in (6) the
maximum correlation occurs at |r; — г2| = ст.
НИ
EXERCISE 12.1-3
Differential Equations Governing the Mutual Coherence Function. In free space, U(r, $)
must satisfy the wave equation, V?U — (1/c?)0?U/0t? = 0. Use the definition (12.1-21) to show
that the mutual coherence function G(r1, r2, т) satisfies a pair of partial differential equations known
as the Wolf equations,
1 @G
2 —
1 0?С
2 —

VG — 59 = 0, (12.1-24b)
where V7 and V3 are the Laplacian operators with respect to г; and го, respectively.
НИ
Mutual Intensity
The spatial correlation of light may be assessed by examining the dependence of the
mutual coherence function on position at a specified fixed time delay т. In many

12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOM LIGHT 485
situations the point т = 0 is the most appropriate to consider, as in the example
illustrated in Fig. 12.1-7(a). The mutual coherence function at т = 0 is known as
the mutual intensity,

С (гу, г2,0) = (U*(r1,t) U(r, t)), (12.1-25)
and is usually denoted by С (гл, г2) for simplicity. The diagonal values of the mutual
intensity (гг = rg = г) yield the intensity I(r) = G(r,r). It is sometimes appro-
priate to use values of 7 other than т = 0, however, as the example in Fig. 12.1-7(6)
illustrates.

When the optical pathlength differences encountered in an optical system are much
shorter than the coherence length № = сте, the light effectively possesses complete
temporal coherence, in which case the mutual coherence function is a harmonic func-
tion of time [see (12.1-10)],

С (гу, го, т) = G(r1, re) exp(jwor), (12.1-26)
where м = wo/27 is the central frequency. The light is then referred to as quasi-
monochromatic and the mutual intensity G(r, г2) completely describes the spatial
coherence.

Аст = 0, the complex degree of coherence g(r1, 12,0) is called the normalized
mutual intensity and is denoted 9(г1, r2):

g(t1.t2) = Gri. 82) (12.1-27)

V1 (r1)L(r2) Normalized Mutual Intensity
The magnitude |9(г1,г2)| is bounded between zero and unity and is regarded as a
measure of the degree of spatial coherence when the time delay т = 0. If the complex
wavefunction U(r, $) is deterministic, |g(r1, r2)| = 1 for all r; and ro, and the light is
completely correlated everywhere.

Coherence Area

In a given plane, in the vicinity of a given position rg, the spatial coherence of quasi-
monochromatic light is described by |g(11, r2)| as a function of the distance |r — ro|.
This function is unity when г1 = го and decreases (but not necessarily monotonically)
as |r; — г2| increases. The area scanned by the point r; within which the function
|9(гт, 2) | is greater than some prescribed value (1/2 or 1/e, for example) is called the
coherence area A... It represents the spatial extent of |g(11, r2)| as a function of r, for
a fixed value of го, as illustrated in Fig. 12.1-8. In the ideal limit of coherent light, the
coherence area is infinite.

The coherence area is an important parameter for characterizing random light, but
it must be viewed in relation to other pertinent dimensions of the optical system under
consideration. For example, if the coherence area is greater than the size of an aperture
through which the light is transmitted, we have |9(г1, г2)| 1 at all points of interest,
so that the light may be regarded as coherent (just as if A, were infinite). Similarly, if
the coherence area is smaller than the spatial resolution of the optical system, it can be
regarded as infinitesimal, 1.е., 9(г1, г2) = 0 for practically all г: 52 ro. In this limit,
the light is said to be incoherent.

Light emitted from an extended radiating hot surface has a coherence area of the
order of \?, where Л is the central wavelength, so that in most practical cases such light
may be regarded as incoherent. Complete coherence and incoherence are therefore seen
to be idealizations that represent the two limits of partial coherence.

486 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
ign, го) |g(r1, ¥2)|
ri / = и >
д! |
Yr с Ас
0 0
(а) (b)
Figure 12.1-8 Two illustrative examples of the magnitude of the normalized mutual intensity as a
function of r; in the vicinity of a fixed point г. The coherence area in (a) is smaller than that in (6).
Cross-Spectral Density
The mutual coherence function G(r1,1r2,7) describes the spatial correlation at each
time delay т. The time delay т = 0 is selected to define the mutual intensity
G(r1,¥2) = G(r1,1r2,0), which is suitable for describing the spatial coherence
of quasi-monochromatic light. A useful alternative is to describe coherence in the
frequency domain by examining the spatial correlation at a fixed frequency. The cross-
spectral density (or the cross-power spectrum) is defined as the Fourier transform of
С(гу, го, т) with respect to т:
co
$(г1,г2, и) = ] С(г1, го, т) ехр(—72пит) ат. (12.1-28)
—со Cross-Spectral Density
When r; = re = г, the cross-spectral density becomes the power-spectral density
S(v) at position r, as defined in (12.1-17).
The normalized cross-spectral density is defined by
S(r1, га, и
$(г1, га, и) = SET) (12.1-29)
S(r1,11,V/) 5(г2, го, и)
Its magnitude can be shown to be bounded between zero and unity, so that it serves as а
measure of the degree of spatial coherence at the frequency и. It represents the degree
of correlation of the fluctuation components of frequency и at positions r; and ro.

In certain cases, the cross-spectral density factors into a product of a function of
position and another of frequency, 5(г1, га, и) = G(r1, r2)s(v), so that the spatial and
spectral properties are separable. The light is then said to be cross-spectrally pure. The
mutual coherence function must then also factor into a product of a function of position
and another of time, С(г1, го, т) = G(r1,r2)g(T), where 9(т) is the inverse Fourier
transform of s(v). If the factorization parts are selected such that | s(v) dv = 1, then
G(r1,t2) = С(т1, г2, 0), so that G(r, г2) is nothing but the mutual intensity. Cross-
spectrally pure light has two important properties:

1. At a single position г, S(r,r,v) = G(r,r)s(v) = I(r)s(v). The spectrum has

the same profile at all positions. If the light represents a visible image, it would
appear to have the same color everywhere but the brightness would vary.

12.1 STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF RANDOM LIGHT 487

2. The normalized cross-spectral density

$(г1, га, и) = G(r, r2)/VG(r1,11) G(re,r2) = g(t, 62) (12.1-30)
is independent of frequency. In this case the normalized mutual intensity
g(¥1,¥2) describes the spatial coherence at all frequencies.

D. Longitudinal Coherence
In this section the concept of longitudinal coherence is introduced by taking examples
of random waves with fixed wavefronts, such as plane and spherical waves.
Partially Coherent Plane Wave
Consider a plane wave
z . z
U(r, t) = a(t _ =) ехр [бы (. _ =) (12.1-31)
с с
traveling in the z direction in a homogeneous medium with velocity с, as considered т
Sec. 2.6A. The complex wavefunction U(r, #) satisfies the wave equation for an arbi-
trary function a(t). If a(¢) is a random function, U(r, t) represents partially coherent
light. The mutual coherence function defined in (12.1-21) is then
Сл, го, т) =Ga (7 _ ==) ехр | (; _ ==) (12.1-32)
с с
where 21 and 22 are the z components of r; and rg and G(r) = (a*(t)a(t + 7))
is the autocorrelation function of a(t), which is assumed to be independent of t [see
Fig. 12.1-7(b)].

The intensity I(r) = G(r,r,0) = Са(0) is constant everywhere in space. Tem-
poral coherence is characterized by the time function G(r,r,7) = Са(т) ехр( от),
which is independent of position. The complex degree of coherence is g(r,r,7) =
9а(т) exp(jwor), where 9а(т) = Са(т)/Са(0). The width of |ga(7)| = |9(г,г,т)|,
defined by an expression similar to (12.1-10), is the coherence time те. It is the same
at all positions.

The power spectral density is the Fourier transform of G(r,r,7) with respect to т.
From (12.1-32), S(v) is seen to be equal to the Fourier transform of С’. (т) shifted by a
frequency vp (in accordance with the frequency shift property of the Fourier transform
defined in Appendix A, Sec. A.1). The wave therefore has the same power spectral
density everywhere in space.

The spatial coherence properties are described by

т, го, 0) = c.(2—*) exp ino] (12.1-33)
and its normalized version

g(ti.r2,0) = ga (===) ехр ino) . (12.1-34)
If the two points г: and rg lie in the same transverse plane, 1.е., 21 = Z, then
19(г1,г2,0)| = |ga(0)| = 1. This means that fluctuations at points оп a wavefront

488 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
(a plane normal to the z axis) are completely correlated; the coherence area in any
transverse plane is infinite (see Fig. 12.1-9). On the other hand, fluctuations at two
points separated by an axial distance 22 — 21 such that |22—21|/с > Те, or |22—21| > |
where |. = стс is the coherence length, are approximately uncorrelated.

[с = стс

|<—| |9) Sv)

— —=— 7с <— Ак
<
0 т 0 м и
Correlated
Uncorrelated

Figure 12.1-9 The fluctuations of a partially coherent plane wave at points on any wavefront
(transverse plane) are completely correlated, whereas those at points on wavefronts separated by an
axial distance greater than the coherence length [. = cr, are approximately uncorrelated.

We conclude that the partially coherent plane wave is spatially coherent across
each transverse plane, but only partially coherent in the axial direction. The axial
(longitudinal) spatial coherence of the wave has a one-to-one correspondence with the
temporal coherence. The relationship of the coherence length |. = сте to the maximum
optical path difference in the system Imax governs the role played by coherence. If
le > Imax, the wave is effectively completely coherent. The coherence lengths of
various light sources were provided in Table 12.1-2.

Partially Coherent Spherical Wave
A partially coherent spherical wave is described by the complex wavefunction (see
Sec. 2.2B and Sec. 2.6A)
1 т ; т
U(r,t) = — a(t _ “) exp [бы (i _ =). (12.1-35)
r с с
where a(t) is а random function. The corresponding mutual coherence function is
1 то —т то —т
G(r1,r%2,7) = —— Са (; _ nar) exp | (: _ pon) ‚  (12.1-36)
rire Cc с
with Са(т) = (a*(t) a(t +7)).

The intensity I(r) = G(0)/r? varies in accordance with an inverse-square law.
The coherence time 7, is the width of the function |9а(т)| = |Ga(7)/Ga(0)|. It is the
same everywhere in space, as is the power spectral density. For т = 0, fluctuations at
all points on a spherical wavefront are completely correlated, whereas fluctuations at
points on two wavefronts separated by the radial distance |rg — 71| >> |. = ст are
uncorrelated (see Fig. 12.1-10).

An arbitrary partially coherent wave transmitted through a pinhole generates a par-
tially coherent spherical wave. This process therefore imparts spatial coherence to the
incident wave (points on any sphere centered about the pinhole become completely
correlated). However, the wave remains temporally partially coherent. Points at differ-
ent distances from the pinhole are only partially correlated. The pinhole imparts spatial
coherence, but not temporal coherence, to the wave.

12.2 INTERFERENCE OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 489
Zoey
\ я
Figure 12.1-10 A partially coherent spherical
И wave exhibits complete spatial coherence at all
2) points on a wavefront, while points on wavefronts
separated by a distance greater than the coherence
length [. = ст. are approximately uncorrelated.
Uncorrelated
wavefronts
Suppose now that an optical filter of very narrow spectral width is placed at the
pinhole, causing the transmitted wave to become approximately monochromatic. The
wave will then have complete temporal as well as spatial coherence. Spatial coherence
is imparted by the pinhole, which acts as a spatial filter, while temporal coherence
is introduced by the narrowband filter. The price paid for obtaining such an ideally
coherent wave is, of course, the loss of optical energy associated with the temporal and
spatial filtering processes.
12.2 INTERFERENCE OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT
The interference of coherent light was discussed in Sec. 2.5. This section is devoted to
the interference of partially coherent light.
A. Interference of Two Partially Coherent Waves
The statistical properties of two partially coherent waves U; and U2 are characterized
not only by their own mutual coherence functions but also by a measure of the degree to
which their fluctuations are correlated. At a given position г and time $, the intensities
of the two waves are J; = (|U;|?) and 15 = (|U2|"), whereas their cross-correlation is
described by the statistical average G12 = (U{U2), along with its normalized version
010:
gy = Ae) (12.2-1)
Vile
When the two waves are superposed, the average intensity of their sum is
T= (Uy + Use|?) = (Ui |?) + (|U2|?) + (UZU2) + (0,05)
=Л+Ь+Сь + Gig = N+ Ig + 2Re{Gi}
We thus obtain
Interference Equation
where ф = arg{gi2} is the phase of 912. The third term on the right-hand side of
(12.2-3) represents optical interference.
It is useful to consider two limits of this equation:
1. For two completely correlated waves with gi2 = exp(jy) and |gi2| = 1, we
recover the interference equation (2.5-4) for two coherent waves of phase differ-
ence р.

490 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS

2. For two uncorrelated waves with gi2 = 0, the result is J = Г! + [5 and there is

no interference.

In the general case, the normalized intensity versus the phase y assumes the form
of a sinusoidal pattern, as shown in Fig. 12.2-1. The strength of the interference is
measured by the visibility V (also called the modulation depth or the contrast of the
interference pattern):

Imax — Imi
vee (12.2-4)
Iinax + ила
where Imax and [min are, respectively, the maximum and minimum values that J takes
as ф is varied. Since cos ф stretches between 1 and —1, inserting (12.2-3) into (12.2-4)
yields
2/111,
v= ——— . 12.2-5
Lib |912] ( )
The visibility is therefore proportional to the absolute value of the normalized cross-
correlation |912|. In the special case when Г! = J, this simplifies to
У = |g). (12.2-6)
Visibility

2 |912]

Г 4 Figure 12.2-1 Normalized intensity 1/21
20 АЛИС of the sum of two partially coherent waves
ЕЕ НЕЕ: -Е-ЕУ-4- -т of equal intensities (J, = Ig = I), as a
function of the phase ф of their normalized

pooh cross-correlation gi2. This sinusoidal pattern

0 a р р > has visibility V = |912].

The interference equation (12.2-3) will now be considered in a number of specific
contexts to highlight the effects that temporal and spatial coherence have on the inter-
ference of partially coherent light.

B. Interferometry and Temporal Coherence

Consider a partially coherent wave U(t) with intensity [о and complex degree of
temporal coherence 9(т) = (U*(t)U(t+7)) /15. If U(t) is simply added to a replica of
itself that is delayed by the time т, 0 (&- т), what is the intensity J of the superposition?

Using the interference formula (12.2-2) with U; = U(t), (5 = U(t4+7), П=Ь =
Ip, and 912 = (U{U2)/Ip = (U*(t)U(t + 7))/Io = 9(т), we obtain

I = 2Ip [1 + Re {g(r)}] = 21 [1+ |g(r)| cos ¢(7)], (12.2-7)
where ф(т) = arg{g(r)}. It is thus apparent that the ability of a wave to interfere
with a time delayed replica of itself is governed by its complex degree of temporal
coherence at that time delay.

12.2 INTERFERENCE OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 491

Implementing the addition of a wave with a time-delayed replica of itself may be
achieved by using a beamsplitter to generate two identical waves, one of which is made
to traverse a longer optical path than the other, and then recombining them at another
(or the same) beamsplitter. This can be effected, for example, with the help of a Mach—
Zehnder or a Michelson interferometer (see Fig. 2.5-3).

Consider, as an example, the partially coherent plane wave introduced in Sec. 12.1D
[see (12.1-31)], whose complex degree of temporal coherence is 9(т) = ga(T)
exp(jwoT). The spectral width of the wave is Av, = 1/т., where те (the width of
|ga(7)|) is the coherence time. Substituting this into (12.2-7), we obtain

I = 21 {1 + |9а(т)| cos [вот + Yal(T)]}, (12.2-8)
where фа(т) = are{ ga(T)}.

This relation between J and 7, which is known as an interferogram, is illustrated
in Fig. 12.2-2. Assuming that Av, = 1/7. < vo, the functions |да(т)| and фа(т) vary
slowly in comparison with the period 1/1. The visibility of this interferogram in the
vicinity of a particular time delay т is У = |9(т)| = |9а(т)|. It has a peak value of
unity near т = 0 and vanishes for T >> тс, 1.е., when the optical path difference is
much greater than the coherence length [‹ = сте. For the Michelson interferometer
illustrated in Fig. 12.2-2, т = 2(d2 — а1) /с. Interference occurs only when the optical
path difference is smaller than the coherence length.

1 —— / \ | 21912]
U a2 2 4 |
|
| | м и
U,+U2 1 0 N /

9 7 =2Ady-ad})/c

Figure 12.2-2 The normalized intensity [/2Jo, as a function of the time delay т, when a partially

coherent plane wave is introduced into a Michelson interferometer. The visibility is a measure of the

magnitude of the complex degree of temporal coherence.

The magnitude of the complex degree of temporal coherence of a wave, |9(т)|,
may therefore be measured by monitoring the visibility of the interference pattern as a
function of time delay. The phase of g(7) may be measured by observing the locations
of the peaks of the pattern.

Fourier-Transform Spectroscopy
It is revealing to write (12.2-7) in terms of the power spectral density of the wave S(v).
Using the Fourier-transform relation between G(r) and S(v),
со
G(r) = Iog(T) = ] S(v) ехр(12тит) dv, (12.2-9)
0
substituting into (12.2-7), and noting that S(v) is real and that [5° S(v) dv = Ip, we
obtain
I= 2 | S(v) [1+ cos(2nvr)| dv. (12.2-10)
0

492 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS

This equation can be interpreted as representing a weighted superposition of inter-
ferograms produced by each of the monochromatic components of the wave. Each
component и produces an interferogram with period 1/v and unity visibility, but the
composite interferogram exhibits reduced visibility by virtue of the different periods.

Equation (12.2-10) suggests that the spectral density S(v) of a light source can be
determined by measuring the interferogram J versus 7 and then inverting the result by
means of Fourier-transform methods. This technique is known as Fourier-transform
spectroscopy.

Optical Coherence Tomography
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an interferometric technique for profiling
a multilayered medium, i.e., for measuring the reflectance and depth of each of its
boundaries. In its simplest form, known as time-domain OCT, it makes use of a par-
tially coherent light source of short coherence length and a Michelson interferometer.
As illustrated in Fig. 12.2-3, a replica of the original wave, delayed by a movable
mirror, is superposed with a collection of waves reflected from the multiple boundaries
of the sample. Information about the sample profile is carried by the interferogram,
which is the intensity measured at the detector as the movable mirror is translated. By
virtue of the short coherence length of the source, the interferogram comprises sets of
fringes centered at path delays of the movable mirror that match those of the reflecting
boundaries.
Movable
mirror а
---7}---- 10
| | Sample 1 2
tI 3 20 Г т. 13

—_ =m 1

D 0 TI T2 ТЗ т

etector I
Figure 12.2-3 Optical coherence tomography.

Let U(t — т) be the wave reflected from the movable mirror, with its associated
time delay т = d/c,, and let r,;U(t — 7;), i = 1,2,..., be the waves reflected from
the boundaries of the sample, where r; represents the amplitude reflectance at the ith
boundary; the associated time delays are designated 7;. For a symmetric beamsplitter,
the average intensity is then (7) = (|U(t — 7) + У, "О (Е — 7;)|?), which may be
written in normalized form as

T/2Ig =1+ Sr, Ве{9(т — п)} + У rat} Ref g(t} — Ti) }, (12.2-11)
i ij
since the complex degree of temporal coherence of the source is characterized by
g(t) = (U*(t) U(t + 7)) /(U*(t)U(b)).

The left-most summation on the right-hand side of (12.2-11) is of paramount im-
portance since it represents interference between the reference wave from the movable
mirror and each of the waves reflected from the sample boundaries. The right-most
summation represents interference terms associated with pairs of reflections from the
sample; since these terms are independent of the path delay of the movable mirror,
т = d/c, they may be regarded as background contributions and ignored.

12.2 INTERFERENCE OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 493

For a light source of central frequency vp, we have g(T) = ga(T) exp(jwoT), where
the width of да(т) is the coherence time тс. Equation (12.2-11) then becomes

1/20 ¥1+ У ` т |9а(т — т) 008 [w(t — 71) + фа(т — 1), (12.2-12)

i

where фа(т) = arg{ga(r)}. If the source is of short coherence length, the function
Ja(T) is narrow. As illustrated in Fig. 12.2-3, the reflection from each sample boundary
then generates a distinct set of interference fringes of brief duration то, centered about
its corresponding time delay. Measurement of the OCT interferogram therefore permits
the reflectance at each boundary, as well as the width of each of the sample layers, to
be determined.

Optical coherence tomography has proven to be an effective imaging technique in
clinical medicine as well as in engineering. It can also be carried out in a frequency-
domain OCT configuration in the spirit of Fourier-transform spectroscopy. A particu-
larly useful configuration makes use of a narrowband optical source whose frequency is
swept in time (e.g., a wavelength-swept laser); this approach offers improved detection
sensitivity and data-acquisition rates.

C. Interferometry and Spatial Coherence

The effect of spatial coherence on interference is demonstrated by considering the
Young’s double-pinhole interference experiment discussed in Exercise 2.5-2 for co-
herent light. A partially coherent optical wave U(r, t) illuminates an opaque screen
with two pinholes located at positions r; and ry. The wave has mutual coherence
function С (г, г2,т) = (U*(r1,t) U(r2,t + 7)) and complex degree of coherence
g(¥1, г2, т). The intensities at the pinholes are assumed to be equal.

Light is diffracted in the form of two spherical waves centered at the pinholes.
The two waves interfere, and the intensity J of their sum is observed at a point r
in the observation plane, at a distance d from the screen that is sufficiently large so
that the paraboloidal approximation is applicable. In Cartesian coordinates, as shown
in Fig. 12.2-4, г1 = (—a,0,0), ro = (a,0,0), and r = (5,0, а). The intensity is
observed as a function of x. An important geometrical parameter is the angle 0 = 2a/d
subtended by the two pinholes.

А
9
— =
I
6— 24 20
> 2 d g(r), r2)|
x => |=
— а NX > 7] | +
а
va |
0 x
Figure 12.2-4 Young’s double-pinhole interferometer illuminated by partially coherent light.
The incident wave is quasi-monochromatic and has a normalized mutual intensity at the pinholes
described by 9(г1, г2). The normalized intensity [/2Jo in the observation plane, at a large distance
from the pinhole plane, is a sinusoidal function of x with period Л/0 and visibility V = |g(ri, г2)|.

494 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
In the paraboloidal (Fresnel) approximation [see (2.2-17)], the two diffracted spher-
ical waves are approximately related to U(r, t) by
— d 2/2d
Ui (r,t) х (nt ran) = (и — еее ie) (12.2-13a)
_ а — а)? /2а
Ua(r, t) x u(r _ =") = Ото _ ке) ‚ (12.2-13b)
с с
and have approximately equal intensities, J; = Ig = Ip. The normalized cross-
correlation between the two waves at r is
UF (xr, t) 05 (к,
0
where the difference in the time delays encountered by the two waves is given by
7, = Pama lrarl _ а) a? _ ar _ 8 yas
с 2dc dc с

Substituting (12.2-14) into the interference formula (12.2-3) gives rise to an ob-
served intensity J = I(x):

I(x) = 20 [1 + |g(11, го, ть) | cos Ye] , (12.2-16)
where y, = arg{g(r1,¥2,Tr)}. This equation describes the pattern of intensity ob-
served as a function of position x in the observation plane, in terms of the magnitude
and phase of the complex degree of coherence at the pinholes at time delay 7, = 0х /с.
Quasi-Monochromatic Light
Moreover, if the light is quasi-monochromatic with central frequency v9 = wo/27, 1.е.,
Ш9(гу, га, т) © 9(г1, г2) exp(jwoT), then (12.2-16) provides

270

I(x) = 2Ip ВАС Prot), (12.2-17)
where X = с/щ, V = 1|9(г1,г2)|, T = Ox/c, and ф = arg{g(ri,re)}. The
interference-fringe pattern is then sinusoidal with spatial period 4/0 and visibility
У. In analogy with the temporal case, the visibility of the interference pattern is equal
to the magnitude of the complex degree of spatial coherence at the two pinholes
(Fig. 12.2-4). The locations of the peaks depend on the phase y.

If the incident wave in a Young’s interferometer is a coherent plane wave traveling
in the z direction, U(r,t) = exp(—jkz) exp(jwot), then g(r1,r2) = 1, whereupon
|9(г1,г2)| = 1 and arg{g(ri,r2)} = 0. The interference pattern then has unity
visibility and a peak at x = 0. However, if the illumination is, instead, a tilted plane
wave atriving from a direction in the x-z plane that makes a small angle 6, with
respect to the z axis, 1.е., U(r, t) = exp[—j(kz + k0,x)| exp(jwot), then g(r1,r2) =
exp(—jk0,2a). The visibility remains at У = 1, but the tilt results in a phase shift
ф = —k6,2a = —276,,2a/X, so that the interference pattern is shifted laterally by a
fraction (2a0,/A) of a period. When vy = 27, the pattern is shifted by one period.

12.2 INTERFERENCE OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 495
Interference with Light from an Extended Source
Suppose now that the incident light is a collection of independent plane waves arriving
from a source that subtends an angle @, at the plane of the pinhole (Fig. 12.2-5). The
phase shift ‹ф then takes values in the range +27(0,/2)2a/X = +270,a/X and the
fringe pattern is a superposition of displaced sinusoids. If 9, = A/2a, then ф takes
on values in the range +7, which is sufficient to wash out the interference pattern and
thereby reduce its visibility to zero.

5

I
А
° и ORONO
: iN
ВАА АНИ
, оО ООО ООО

5 xX
Figure 12.2-5 Young’s interference fringes are washed out if the illumination emanates from a
source of angular diameter 0, > Л/2а. If the distance 2a is smaller than \/6,, the fringes become
visible.

We conclude that the degree of spatial coherence at the two pinholes is very small
when the angle subtended by the source is 9, > Л/2а. Consequently, a measure of the
coherence distance in the plane of the screen is

А
6 ®—, (12.2-18)
Os Coherence Distance
and a measure of the coherence area of light emitted from a source subtending an angle
9; is described by
х\2
Ас = (7) . (12.2-19)
As
The angle subtended by the sun, for example, is 0.5°, so that the coherence distance for
filtered sunlight of wavelength Л is ре = А/0. = 115A. At A = 0.5 wm, ре & 57.5 um.

A more rigorous analysis (see Sec. 12.3C) reveals that the transverse coherence

distance ре for a circular incoherent light source of uniform intensity is
А
ре = 1.22—. (12.2-20)
As
Effect of Spectral Width on Interference
Finally, we examine the effect of the spectral width of the light on interference in
the Young’s double-pinhole interferometer. The power spectral density of the incident

496 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
wave is assumed to be a narrow function of width Av, centered about vp, and Av, <
м. The complex degree of coherence then takes the form
g(¥1,¥2,7) = да(г1, го, т) exp(JwoT), (12.2-21)
where да(г1, го, т) is a slowly varying function of 7 (in comparison with the period
1/vp). Substituting (12.2-21) into (12.2-16), we obtain
270

I(x) = 21 i + Vz cos (ae + +. , (12.2-22)
where \,, = |9а(г1, го, ть)|, Pe = аг8{ да (1, Го, Те) }s Tx = 05/С, and Л = с/м.

The resulting interference pattern is sinusoidal with period Л/0 but with varying
visibility V,, and varying phase ~,, specified by the magnitude and phase of the com-
plex degree of coherence at the two pinholes, respectively, evaluated at the time delay
Ty = Ox/c. И |9а(г1,г2,т)| = 1 at = 0 and decreases with increasing т, vanishing
for T >> те, then the visibility У, = 1 at = 0 and decreases with increasing x,
vanishing for 1 >> x. = ct./0. The interference pattern is then visible over a distance

I
Leo=-, (12.2-23)
0
where [‹ = сте is the coherence length and 9 is the angle subtended by the two pinholes
(Fig. 12.2-6).
Observation — \
plane | KK 6
I _ le
0-24 20 nae
d -
| x
d 1
Incident Screen 0 0
x
wave |
Figure 12.2-6 The visibility of Young’s interference fringes at position x is the magnitude of the
complex degree of coherence at the pinholes, at a time delay т, = 0/с. For spatially coherent light
the number of observable fringes is the ratio of the coherence length to the central wavelength, or,
equivalently, the ratio of the central frequency to the spectral linewidth.

The number of observable fringes is thus x./(\/0) = I./X = cte/X = Vo/Ave. It
is thus equal to the ratio of the coherence length to the central wavelength, [‹/Л, or the
ratio of the central frequency to the linewidth, vo /Av,. Clearly, if |g(r1, r2,0)| < 1,
1.е., if the source is not spatially coherent, the visibility will be further reduced and
even fewer fringes will be observable.

12.3 TRANSMISSION OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 497
*12.3 TRANSMISSION OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT

The transmission of coherent light through thin optical components, apertures, and free
space was discussed in Chapters 2 and 4. In this section we revisit this discussion for
quasi-monochromatic partially coherent light. We assume that the spectral width of
the light is sufficiently small so that the coherence length [‹ = cr, = c/Av, is much
greater than the differences of optical pathlengths in the system. The mutual coherence
function may then be approximated by G(rj,r2,7) © G(r1,r2) ехр(72лшот), where
G(r1,¥2) is the mutual intensity and 1 is the central frequency.

We observe at the outset that the laws of transmission applicable to the deterministic
function U(r) representing coherent light are also applicable to the random function
U(r) representing partially coherent light. However, for partially coherent light our
interest is in the laws that govern statistical averages: the intensity Г(г) and the mutual
intensity С (гу, г2).

А. Propagation of Partially Coherent Light
Transmission Through Thin Optical Components
When a partially coherent wave is transmitted through a thin optical component char-
acterized by an amplitude transmittance t(z, у), the incident and transmitted waves are
related by Up(r) = t(r)Ui(r) where г = (x,y) is the position in the plane of the
component (see Fig. 12.3-1). Using the definition of the mutual intensity, G(r1,r2) =
(U*(r1)U(r2)), we obtain
G2(r1, г2) = t*(r1) t(r2) Gi (ri, r2), (12.3-1)
where С’! (гу, г2) and G9(r1,1r2) are the mutual intensities of the incident and trans-
mitted light, respectively.
р” Figure 12.3-1 The absolute value of the degree
of spatial coherence is not altered by transmission
Ui(r) Ua(r) through a thin optical component.

Since the intensity at position r is equal to the mutual intensity at r; = rg = r, we

have
In(r) = |)? Г (г). (12.3-2)

The normalized mutual intensities defined by (12.1-27) therefore satisfy

192 (кл, г2)| = [91 (гл, г2)]. (12.3-3)
Although transmission through a thin optical component may change the intensity
of partially coherent light, it does not alter the magnitude of its degree of spatial
coherence. Of course, if the complex amplitude transmittance of the component itself
were random, the coherence of the transmitted light would be altered accordingly.

498 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS

Transmission Through an Arbitrary Optical System

We next consider transmission through an arbitrary optical system — one that includes
propagation in free space and thick optical components. It was shown in Chapter 4
that the complex amplitude U(r) at a point r = (т, у) in the output plane of such a
system is generally a weighted superposition integral comprising contributions from
the complex amplitudes U;(r) at points г’ = (х’, у’) in the input plane,

Ug(r) = ] h(r; г’) Uy(r’) dr’, (12.3-4)
where h(r;r’) is the impulse response function of the system (see Fig. 12.3-2). Equa-
tion (12.3-4) is a double integral with respect to г’ = (x’,y’) that extends over the
entire input plane.

* U(x,y,z) х
0
9
h(r;r’) —
U(r) ИГ)
y Input Optical y Output
plane system plane
Figure 12.3-2 An optical system is characterized by its impulse response function h(r;r’).
To translate this relation between the random complex-amplitude functions U(r)
and О1 (г) into a relation between their mutual intensities, we substitute (12.3-4) into
the definition Go(ri1,r2) = (UZ (r1) U2(r2)) and use the definition Gi(ri,r2) =
(UF (r1) Ui (r2)) to obtain
Go(r1,r2) = // h* (гут) h(a; го) С (гу, го) dr} drs. (12.3-5)
Mutual Intensity
If the mutual intensity G1 (гу, r2) of the input light, and the impulse response function
h(x;r’) of the system are known, the mutual intensity of the output light G2(r1, г2) is
readily determined by computing the integrals in (12.3-5).
The intensity of the output light is obtained by using the definition J2(r) = Go(r,r),
which, with the help of (12.3-5), reduces to
I(r) = // №” (гу) h(x; го) С (ет, го) dr} drs. (12.3-6)
Image Intensity
Thus, to determine the intensity of the output light, we must know the mutual intensity
of the input light. Knowledge of the input intensity Л (г) by itself is generally not
sufficient to determine the output intensity /5(к).

12.3 TRANSMISSION OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 499
B. Image Formation with Incoherent Light
We now consider the special case when the input light is incoherent. The mutual in-
tensity С 1 (г, г2) then vanishes when го is only slightly separated from rj, so that the
coherence distance is much smaller than other pertinent dimensions in the system (for
example, the resolution distance of an imaging system). According to (12.1-27), the
mutual intensity may then be written in the form Gi (11, г2) = ИД (1) (re) g(r —
ro), where 9(г1 — г2) is a very narrow function. When using this expression for
Gi(r1,¥2) in the integrals in (12.3-5) and (12.3-6), it is convenient to approximate
g(v1 — г2) by a delta function, g(r) — г2) = од(г1 — г2), where o = [ g(r) dr is the
area under g(r), whereupon
Ст (гу, г2) ~ ov (11) 1 (r2) O(r1 —Yo). (12.3-7)
Since the mutual intensity must remain finite and 6(0) — со, this equation cannot be
used in general. However, it is suitable for evaluating integrals such as that in (12.3-6).
Substituting (12.3-7) into (12.3-6), the delta function reduces the double integral to a
single integral, which provides
Т5(г) = во) h(x; xr’) dr’, (12.3-8)
Imaging Equation
(Incoherent Illumination)
where
hi(r;r’) = o|h(r;r’)/?. (12.3-9)
Impulse Response Function
(Incoherent Illumination)
Under these conditions, the relation between the intensities at the input and output
planes describes a linear system of impulse response function h;(r;r’), which is also
known as the point-spread function. When the input light is completely incoherent,
therefore, the intensity of the light at each point r on the output plane is a weighted
superposition of contributions from the intensities at many points r’ on the input plane;
there is no interference and the intensities simply add (Fig. 12.3-3). This is to be
contrasted with the completely coherent system, in which the complex amplitudes,
rather than intensities, are related by a superposition integral, as evidenced in (12.3-4).
Figure 12.3-3 (a) The complex ampli-
(a) h(rsr’) tudes of light at the input and output planes
of an optical system illuminated by coherent
light are related by a linear system with
impulse response function h(r;r’). (6) The
intensities of light at the input and output
planes of an optical system illuminated by
incoherent light are related by a linear system
(b) é “ with impulse response function h,(r;r’) =
o|h(r;r’)|?.

500 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS

In many optical systems, the impulse response function h(r;r’) is a function of
r —r’, say h(r — г’). The system is then said to be shift invariant or isoplanatic (see
Appendix В, Sec. B.2). In this case h;(r;r’) = h;(r—r’). The integrals in (12.3-4) and
(12.3-8) then represent two-dimensional convolutions and the systems can be described
by transfer functions H(v,,v,) and Ни», и), which are the Fourier transforms of
h(r) = h(a, у) and h;(r) = №; (т, у), respectively.

As an example, we apply the relations set forth above to an imaging system. The
impulse response function of the single-lens focused imaging system illustrated in
Fig. 12.3-4 was considered in Sec. 4.4C with coherent illumination. It was shown that,
in the Fresnel approximation, it can be expressed as [see (4.4-12)]

cy
(г) «x P | —-, — 12.3-10
хр), (123-90
where P(vz,V,) is the Fourier transform of the pupil function p(x, у) and 45 is the
distance from the lens to the image plane. The pupil function is unity within the
aperture and zero elsewhere.
x
а!
[ | |
y Mt /
И
| ИИ | .
Object я -
plane Lens
Aperture
Image
plane x
Figure 12.3-4 Single-lens imaging system.

When the illumination is quasi-monochromatic and spatially incoherent, the inten-
sities of the light at the object and image planes are linearly related by a system with
impulse response function

х у 2
hi(r) = (г) x Р ( —, = 12.3-11
№ (23-1)
where Л is the wavelength corresponding to the central frequency 1.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 12.3-1. Coherent and Incoherent Imaging Systems with Circular Aper-
tures. If the aperture in Fig. 12.3-4 is a circle of radius a (diameter D = 2a), the pupil function
p(x,y) = 1 for x,y inside the circle, and 0 elsewhere. Its Fourier transform is (see Appendix A,
Sec. A.3)
а.Л (пира)
Р(и.,ы,) = и Vp = (v2 +02, (12.3-12)

12.3 TRANSMISSION OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 501
where J;(-) is the Bessel function of order 1. The impulse response function of the coherent system
is obtained by substituting into (12.3-10),

Л(2ть,
в (т, y) x ame) , p= Very, (12.3-13)
TV sp
where
0 2a
‚= — 0=— 12.3-14
which accords with the result reported in Example 4.4-1 [see (4.4-13)].
For incoherent illumination, the impulse response function is therefore
2
J, (2ть,
hi(x,y) x Е (12.3-15)
пир
The impulse response functions h(x, у) and 1, (х, у) are illustrated in the top row of Fig. 12.3-5. Both
functions reach their first zero when 27,0 = 3.832, огр = р, = 3.832 /2пи, = 3.832 Л/пб, from
which we obtain the two-point resolution
А
ps = 1.225. (12.3-16)
Two-Point Resolution
Thus, the image of a point (impulse) at the input plane is a patch of intensity h; (a, у) and radius p,.
When the input distribution comprises two points (impulses) separated by a distance р., the image of
one point vanishes at the center of the image of the other point. The distance p, is therefore a measure
of the resolution of the imaging system.
2 h(p) Пр)
За 1 1
Яя
5.3
22 1.22\Fz
Zé {
Е
5 0 0
0 Ps p 0 Ps p
Нар) Hi (Vp)
o 1 1
5 Е и AF
Be
0% Vs Up 99 25 Vo
(a) Coherent (b) Incoherent
Figure 12.3-5 Impulse response functions and transfer functions of a single-lens, focused,
diffraction-limited imaging system with a circular aperture and lens fF’, under (a) coherent, and
(b) incoherent illumination.
The transfer functions of linear systems with the impulse response functions h(x, у) and 1; (т, у)
are, respectively, the Fourier transforms (see Appendix A, Sec. A.3),
1, и, < и,
H(v_,Vy) = (12.3-17)
0, otherwise,

502 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
and
2 и и v,\?
= (cos 3) ~~,/1- (5) ‚р <2Vz
Ни и) = 4 7 2s) 2Us 2Us (12.3-18)
0, otherwise,
where vp = ,/vz + иу. Both functions have been normalized such that their values are unity at
V, = 0. These functions are illustrated in the bottom row of Fig. 12.3-5. For coherent illumination, the
transfer function is flat and has a cutoff frequency и, = 9/2. lines/mm. For incoherent illumination,
the transfer function decreases approximately linearly with the spatial frequency and has a cutoff
frequency 2v, = 9/Л lines/mm.

If the object is placed at infinity so that d} = со, we have 45 = }, where f is the focal length of
the lens. The angle 6 = 2a/f is then the inverse of the lens F'-number since Е» = f /2a. The cutoff
frequencies и, and Зи, are thus related to the lens F'-number by [see (4.4-19)]

—— _ (coherent illumination)
D\Fy
Cutoff frequency
,; = (12.3-19)
(lines/mm) 1
Ея (incoherent illumination).

It should not be concluded, however, that incoherent illumination is superior to coherent illumina-
tion because it has twice the spatial bandwidth. The transfer functions for the two systems should not
be compared directly since one describes imaging of the complex amplitude while the other describes
imaging of the intensity.
ПОНИ
С. Gain of Spatial Coherence by Propagation
Equation (12.3-5) describes the change of the mutual intensity when the light propa-
gates through an optical system of impulse response function h(r; г’). When the input
light is incoherent, the mutual intensity G'|(r1, r2) may be approximated by (12.3-7),
whereupon the double integral in (12.3-5) reduces to

Go(r1,r2) = of ean h(re;r) I(r) dr. (12.3-20)
Mutual Intensity

It is evident that the transmitted light is no longer incoherent. In general, light gains
spatial coherence by the mere act of propagation. This can be understood as follows.
Although light fluctuations at different points of the input plane are uncorrelated, the
radiation from each point spreads and overlaps with that from neighboring points. The
light reaching two points at the output plane originates from many points at the input
plane, some of which are common (see Fig. 12.3-6). These common contributions
engender partial correlation between fluctuations at the output points.

This phenomenon is not unlike the transmission of an uncorrelated time signal
(white noise) through a low-pass filter. The filter smoothes the function and reduces its
spectral bandwidth, so that its coherence time increases and it is no longer uncorrelated.
The propagation of light through an optical system is a form of spatial filtering that
reduces the spatial bandwidth and therefore increases the coherence area.

12.3 TRANSMISSION OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 503
ря Lo

/£| Figure 12.3-6 Gain of coherence by propaga-
д С и tion is a result of the spreading of light. Although

2 | the light is completely uncorrelated at the source,
the light fluctuations at points 1 and 2 share а
common origin, the dark shaded area, and are
therefore partially correlated.
Incoherent
source р
van Cittert-Zernike Theorem
There is a mathematical identity between the expressions for the gain of coherence of
initially incoherent light propagating through an optical system, and the change of the
amplitude of coherent light traveling through the same system. With respect to (12.3-
20), if the observation point г: is fixed at the origin 0, for example, and the mutual
intensity G2(0, r2) is examined as a function of г2, then
G2(0,r2) = "| h*(0;r) А(г2; г) Г (г) dr. (12.3-21)
Defining 02(г2) = Go(0,r2) and Uj (г) = ой*(0; г) Г, (г), (12.3-21) may be written
in the familiar form
02 (г2) = [recs г) (1 (г) dr, (12.3-22)
which is nothing other than the integral (12.3-4) that governs the propagation of co-
herent light. Thus, the observed mutual intensity G(0, г2) at the output of an optical
system whose input is incoherent is mathematically identical to the observed complex
amplitude of a coherent wave U;(r) = ой*(0; г) Г! (г) presented at the input of the
same system.

As an example, assume that the incoherent input wave has uniform intensity and
extends over an aperture p(r) [p(r) = 1 within the aperture and zero elsewhere]
so that I;(r) = p(r); and assume also that the optical system is free space so that
h(r’;r) = exp(—jk|r’ — r|)/|r’ — r|. The mutual intensity G2(0, r2) is then identical
to the amplitude U2(r2) obtained when a coherent wave with input amplitude U;(r) =
oh*(0;r)p(r) = op(r) exp(jkr)/r is transmitted through the same system. This is a
spherical wave converging to the point O at the output plane and transmitted through
the aperture.

This connection between the gain of spatial coherence of incoherent light, and
the diffraction of coherent light, traveling through the same system is known as the
Van Cittert—-Zernike theorem.

Gain of Coherence in Free Space
Consider an optical system comprising free-space propagation between two paral-
lel planes separated by a distance d (Fig. 12.3-7). Light at the input plane is quasi-
monochromatic and spatially incoherent, and has intensity I(x, у) extending over а
finite area. The impulse response function is then described by the Fresnel diffraction
formula [see (4.1-18)]:
— h)2 — 7/2
h(t; г) = ho exp [in , (12.3-23)

504 — СНАРТЕВ 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
where г = (т, у, 4) andr’ = (2’, у’, 0) are the coordinates of points at the output and
input planes, respectively, and hy = (j/Ad) exp(—j2md/X) is a constant.
x x
| . (x,y)
г о, 5)"
<
Source
, ОБ ti
d
Figure 12.3-7 Radiation from an incoherent source in free space.
We determine the mutual coherence function С (71, 1, 22, y2) at two points (271, 9/1}
and (12, y2) in the output plane, by substituting (12.3-23) into (12.3-20) to obtain
Co
20
| (21, 41, 22, y2)| — 01 ехр Id [(x2 —a1)a + (у — у) Г(х, у) ах dy} ,
_ (12.3-24)
where 0; = о? = o/d?d? is another constant. Given I(x, у), one can easily
determine |G(x1, y1, 22, y2)| in terms of the two-dimensional Fourier transform of
I(x, у),
CO
и, Vy) = // exp[j27(vrx + vyy)| I(x, у) dx dy, (12.3-25)
—со
evaluated at и, = (52 — 21)/ЛА and и, = (у2 — y1)/Ad. The magnitude of the
corresponding normalized mutual intensity is then
27 1 Ya Vi
11,2, = |J{ ——_,, > J(0, 0). 12.3-26
понад = (ето) оу. | 023-26
This Fourier transform-relation between the intensity profile of an incoherent source
and the degree of spatial coherence of its far field is similar to the Fourier-transform
relation between the amplitude of coherent light at the input and output planes (see
Sec. 4.2A). The similarity is expected in view of the Van Cittert—Zernike theorem.
The implications of (12.3-26) are profound. If the area of the source, i.e., the spatial
extent of I(x, у), is small, its Fourier transform J(v,,1%,) is wide, so that the mutual
intensity at the output plane extends over a wide area and the area of coherence at the
output plane is large. In the extreme limit in which light at the input plane originates
from a point, the area of coherence is infinite and the radiated field is spatially com-
pletely coherent. This confirms our earlier discussions in Sec. 12.1D with respect to
the coherence of spherical waves. On the other hand, if the input light originates from
a large extended source, the propagated light has a small area of coherence.

12.3 TRANSMISSION OF PARTIALLY COHERENT LIGHT 505
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 12.3-2. Radiation from an Incoherent Circular Source. For input light with
uniform intensity I(x, у) = Го confined to a circular aperture of radius a, (12.3-26) yields

2.7, (пр, /2)
= —_ 12.3-27
where р = \/(#2 — 1)? + (yo — y1)? is the distance between the two points, 9, = 2a/d is the angle
subtended by the source, and J,(-) is the Bessel function. This relation is plotted in Fig. 12.3-8. The
Bessel function reaches its first zero when its argument is 3.832. We can therefore define the area of
coherence as a circle of radius р. = 3.832(\/76,), so that
А
po = 1.225-. (12.3-28)
5 Coherence Distance
A similar result, (12.2-18), was obtained using a less rigorous analysis. The area of coherence is
inversely proportional to 62. An incoherent light source of wavelength Л = 0.6 ym and radius 1 ст
observed at a distance d = 100 та, for example, has a coherence distance р. = 3.7 mm.
y
<
| a Po = 1.22 8;
Incoherent IE
source ^^
©. 0 Pe й
wa

Figure 12.3-8 The magnitude of the degree of spatial coherence of light radiated from an
incoherent circular light source subtending an angle @,, as a function of the separation р.
«И
Measurement of the Angular Diameter of Stars: The Michelson Stellar
Interferometer
Equation (12.3-28) is the basis of a method for measuring the angular diameters of
stars. If the star is regarded as an incoherent disk of diameter 2a with uniform bril-
liance, then at an observation plane a distance d away from the star, the coherence
function decreases to 0 when the separation between the two observation points reaches
Pc = 1.22X/0,. Measuring ре at a given value of Л permits us to determine the angular
diameter 9, = 2a/d.

As an example, taking the angular diameter of the sun to be 0.5°, 9, = 8.7 x
10-3 radians, and assuming that the intensity is uniform, we obtain ре = 140A. For
А = 0.5 um, we have ре = 70 пла. To observe interference fringes in a Young double-
slit apparatus, the slits would have to be separated by a distance smaller than 70 wm.
Stars of smaller angular diameter have correspondingly larger areas of coherence. For
example, the first star whose angular diameter was measured using this technique (a-
Orion) has an angular diameter 0. = 22.6 x 10-8, so that at Л = 0.57 jum, we have
Pc = 3.1m. A Young interferometer can be modified to accommodate such large slit
separations by using movable mirrors, as shown in Fig. 12.3-9.

506 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
— ' м! | | * Figure 12.3-9 The Michelson stellar
interferometer. The angular diameter of
— а star is estimated by measuring the mu-
tual intensity at two points with variable
p = separation p using a Young double-slit
interferometer. The distance p between
— mirrors M, and Mp is varied and the
visibility of the interference fringes is
ty measured. When р = ре = 1.22X/6,,
M2 the visibility is 0.
Screen 1
12.4 PARTIAL POLARIZATION
As we have seen in Chapter 6, the scalar wave theory of light is often inadequate
and a vector theory that includes the polarization of light is required. This section
provides a brief discussion of the statistical theory of random light, including the
effects of polarization. The theory of partial polarization is based on characterizing
the components of the optical field vector by correlations and cross-correlations similar
to those defined earlier in this chapter.

To simplify the presentation, we shall not be concerned with spatial effects. We
therefore limit ourselves to light described by a transverse electromagnetic (TEM)
plane wave traveling in the z direction. The electric-field vector has two components, in
the x and у directions, with complex wavefunctions 0, (#) and U,,(t) that are generally
random. Each function is characterized by its autocorrelation function (the temporal
coherence function),

Goo(T) = (UR(1U2(t +7) (12.4-1)

Gyy(T) = (Uj (Uy (t + 7)). (12.4-2)
An additional descriptor of the wave is the cross-correlation function of U,(t) and
U, (i),

Gay (т) = (Uz (t)U,(t+7)). (12.4-3)
The normalized function

Jxy(T) = —_ бы) (12.4-4)

V Gox(0)G@yy(0)

is the cross-correlation coefficient of U,(t) and U,(t + т). It satisfies the inequality
0 < |gzy(7)| < 1. When the two components are uncorrelated at all times, |gzy(7)| =
0; when they are completely correlated at all times, |gz,(7)| = 1.

The spectral properties are, in general, tied to the polarization properties and the
autocorrelation and cross-correlation functions can have different dependencies оп т.
However, for quasi-monochromatic light, all dependencies on т in (12.4-1)—(12.4-4)
are approximately of the form exp(j2mvoT), so that the polarization properties are
described by the values at 7 = 0. The three numbers G,,.(0), Gy,(0), and Gy (0),
hereafter denoted Gz, Gy,, and G,, are then used to describe the polarization of the
wave. Note that Gz, = J; and С’, = I, are real numbers that represent the intensities
of the x and у components, but С’, is complex and Gy, = G?,, as can easily be
verified from the definition.

12.4 PARTIAL POLARIZATION 507
Coherency Matrix
It is convenient to write the four variables Ск, Gry, Gyz, and Gy, in the form of a
2 x 2 Hermitian matrix
G G
G= г "| (12.4-5)
Gyr Gyy
called the coherency matrix. The diagonal elements are the intensities Г», and Г,,
whereas the off-diagonal elements are the cross-correlations. The trace of the matrix,
given by TrG = J, + I, = I, is the total intensity.

The coherency matrix may also be written in terms of the Jones vector, J = М
defined in terms of the complex wavefunctions and complex amplitudes (instead of in
terms of the complex envelopes as in Sec. 6.1B),

U; UZU. UZU,
(SIT) =( | | [U, Uy] ) = и = и | с, (12.4-6)
0, (UjUx) (Uj; Uy)
where the superscript т denotes the transpose of a matrix, and U, and U, denote U;(t)
and (7, ($), respectively.

The Jones vector is transformed by polarization devices, such as polarizers and
retarders, in accordance with the rule J’ = TJ [see (6.1-17)], where T is the Jones
matrix representing the device [see (6.1-18) to (6.1-25)]. The coherency matrix is
therefore transformed in accordance with С" = (T*J*(TJ)') = (T*J*I'T') =
T*(J*J'\T", so that

С/ =T*GT'. (12.4-7)
We thus have a formalism for determining the effect of polarization devices on the
coherency matrix of partially polarized light.
Stokes Parameters and Poincaré-Sphere Representation
The Stokes parameters were defined in Sec. 6.1A for coherent light as a set of four real
parameters related to the products of the x and у components of the complex envelope
[see (6.1-9)]. This definition is readily generalized to partially coherent light as an
average of these products:
So = (|Usl?) + (Wyl?) = Gee + би (12.4-8а)
$1 = (|Uz|?) — (|0) = Gre = Gyy (12.4-8b)
52 = 2Re{(UZU,)} = 2Re{Gz,} (12.4-8c)
53 = 2Im{(UZU,)} = 2Im{Gzy}. (12.4-8d)
Stokes Parameters
Thus, the Stokes parameters are directly related to elements of the coherency matrix
G. The first parameter, So, is simply the sum of the diagonal elements, which is the
total intensity Г. The second, $1, is the difference of the diagonal elements, 1.е., the
difference between the intensities of the two polarization components. The third and

508 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS

fourth, 52 and S3, respectively, are proportional to the real and imaginary parts of
the off-diagonal element, i.e., the cross-correlation function. Using these relations, it
can be readily shown that the inequality IGoy|? < GzrrGyy, leads to the condition
S} + 52 + 53 < 52. For coherent light, these inequalities become equalities.

The state of polarization of partially polarized light may be represented geometri-
cally on the Poincaré sphere (Fig. 6.1-5) as a point whose Cartesian coordinates are
(51/50, S2/So, 53/50). Since 51 + 55 + 53 < SZ, such a point lies inside, or on, the
surface of the sphere.

To understand the significance of the coherency matrix and the Stokes parameters,
we next examine two limiting cases.

Unpolarized Light
Light of intensity J is said to be unpolarized if its two components have the same
intensity and are uncorrelated, i.e., [, = Г, = sl and Gz, = 0. The coherency matrix
is then
G=i] о о (12.4-9)
Unpolarized Light
By use of (12.4-7) and (6.1-22), it can be shown that (12.4-9) is invariant to rotation of
the coordinate system, so that the two components always have equal intensities and are
uncorrelated. Unpolarized light therefore has an electric-field vector that is statistically
isotropic; it is equally likely to have any direction in the x—-y plane, as illustrated in
Fig. 12.4-1(a). Analogous results for partially polarized and right-circularly polarized
(RCP) light are displayed in Figs. 12.4-1(6) and 12.4-1(c), respectively.
RCP
oe aie . В Polarized
к 7 < i У иг 7 sa
и \ H \ и м polarized
i | | | \ Unpolarized

(a) Unpolarized (b) Partially polarized (с) Polarized (RCP) (d) Poincaré sphere
Figure 12.4-1 Fluctuations of the electric-field vector for (a) unpolarized light, (b) partially
polarized light, and (c) polarized light with circular polarization. (d) Poincaré-sphere representation
for unpolarized light (at the origin), partially polarized light (in the interior), and elliptically polarized
light (on the surface).

When passed through a polarizer, unpolarized light becomes linearly polarized, but
it remains random with an average intensity 31 . A wave retarder has no effect on
unpolarized light since it only introduces a phase shift between two components that
have a totally random phase to begin with. Similarly, unpolarized light transmitted
through a polarization rotator remains unpolarized. These effects may be formally
derived by use of (12.4-7) and (12.4-9) together with (6.1-18), (6.1-19), and (6.1-20),
respectively. _

The Stokes parameters describing unpolarized light are (So, S1, 52, 53) = (J, 0,0, 0)
as can be readily shown by use of (12.4-8) and (12.4-9). The corresponding representa-
tion on the Poincaré sphere is a point with Cartesian coordinates (S1/So, 52/50, 53/50)
= (0, 0,0) so that the point is located at the origin of the sphere [Fig. 12.4-1(d)].

12.4 PARTIAL POLARIZATION 509
Polarized Light
If the cross-correlation coefficient gry = Gry//I, Ly has unity magnitude, |g,y| = 1,
the two components of the optical field are perfectly correlated and the light is said to
be completely polarized (or simply polarized). The coherency matrix then takes the
form
1 \/Tpl, ей
с — "о oe (12.4-10)
\/ Lely e 1$ Ty
where ¢ is the argument of g,. Defining U, = УТ, and U, = ,/T, e7”, we have
USU, 0*0
G=| 7 oe | =J‘J', (12.4-11)
be 0. U,jUy
where J is а Jones matrix with components О», and Оу. Thus, С has the same form
as the coherency matrix of a coherent wave. Using the Jones vectors provided in
Table 6.1-1, we can determine the coherency matrices for different states of polari-
zation. Two examples are:
Linearly polarized G=i 10 Right-circularly Gali 17
in the x direction: ~~ 10 0 polarized: ~ 2° |-7 1

The Stokes parameters corresponding to (12.4-11) satisfy the relation S?7+S3+S3 =
52, so that polarized light is represented by a point on the surface of, rather than inside,
the Poincaré sphere [Fig. 12.4-1(d)].

It is instructive to examine the distinction between unpolarized light and circularly
polarized light. In both cases the intensities of the x and у components are equal
(I, = I,). For circularly polarized light the two components are completely corre-
lated, but for unpolarized light they are uncorrelated. Circularly polarized light may be
transformed into linearly polarized light by the use of a wave retarder, but unpolarized
light remains unpolarized upon passage through such a device. Circularly polarized
light is represented by a point at the north or south pole of the Poincaré sphere, while
unpolarized light is represented by a point at the origin [Fig. 12.4-1(d)].

Degree of Polarization
Partial polarization is a general state of random polarization that lies between the
two ideal limits of unpolarized and polarized light. One measure of the degree of
polarization P is defined in terms of the determinant and the trace of the coherency
matrix:
4detG
P=,/1-— Y,> 12.4-12
\'~ газ (124-12)
L,I
=,/1-4)|——~+,| (1- 2). 12.4-13

учет (t= вы) (124-13)

This measure is meaningful because of the following considerations:

510 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
= It satisfies the inequality 0 < P < 1.
= For polarized light, P has its highest value of 1, as can readily be seen by substi-
tuting |gry| = 1 into (12.4-13). For unpolarized light it has its lowest value P = 0,
since I, = I and gry = 0.
= It is invariant to rotation of the coordinate system (since the determinant and the
trace of a matrix are invariant to unitary transformations).
= The degree of polarization in (12.4-13) may also be expressed in terms of the
Stokes parameters as:
М7 + 52 + $3
p= 4 3 (12.4-14)
So
so that in the Poincaré-sphere representation [Fig. 12.4-1(d)], it is equal to the
distance from the origin of the sphere.
= It can be shown (Exercise 12.4-1) that a partially polarized wave can always be
regarded as a mixture of two uncorrelated waves: a completely polarized wave and
an unpolarized wave, with the ratio of the intensity of the polarized component to
the total intensity equal to the degree of polarization P.
НИ
EXERCISE 12.4-1
Partially Polarized Light. Demonstrate that the superposition of unpolarized light of intensity
(1, + Iy)(1 —P), and linearly polarized light with intensity (Г, - Г,)Р, where P is given by (12.4-13),
yields light whose x and у components have intensities Г, and Г, and normalized cross-correlation
И
READING LIST
Statistical Optics, Coherence, and Partial Polarization
J. J. Gil Pérez and В. Ossikovski, Polarized Light and the Mueller Matrix Approach, CRC Press/Taylor
& Francis, 2016.
J. W. Goodman, Statistical Optics, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2015.
E. Wolf, Introduction to the Theory of Coherence and Polarization of Light, Cambridge University
Press, 2007.
O. Marchenko, S. Kazantsev, and L. Windholz, Demonstrational Optics: Part 2, Coherent and Sta-
tistical Optics, Springer-Verlag, 2007.
M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University Press, 7th expanded and corrected
ed. 2002, Chapter 10.
B. R. Frieden, Probability, Statistical Optics, and Data Testing: A Problem Solving Approach,
Springer-Verlag, 1983, 3rd ed. 2001.
C. Brosseau, Fundamentals of Polarized Light: A Statistical Optics Approach, Wiley, 1998.
L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Г. Mandel and Е. Wolf, eds., Selected Papers on Coherence and Fluctuations of Light (1850-1966),
SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 19), 1990.
M. C. Teich and B. E. A. Saleh, Photon Bunching and Antibunching, in E. Wolf, ed., Progress in
Optics, North-Holland, 1988, vol. 26, pp. 1-104.
J. Рейпа, Coherence of Light, Reidel, 1971, 2nd ed. 1985.

READING LIST 511

В. Е. A. Saleh, Photoelectron Statistics with Applications to Spectroscopy and Optical Communica-
tion, Springer-Verlag, 1978.

B. Crosignani, P. Di Porto, and M. Bertolotti, Statistical Properties of Scattered Light, Academic
Press, 1975.

R. Hanbury-Brown, The Intensity Interferometer: Its Application to Astronomy, Taylor & Francis,
1974.

L. Mandel and E. Wolf, eds., Selected Papers on Coherence and Fluctuations of Light, Volumes 1
and 2, Dover, 1970.

М. J. Beran and G. В. Parrent, Л., Theory of Partial Coherence, Prentice Hall, 1964; SPIE Optical
Engineering Press, reissued 1974.

E. L. O’Neill, Introduction to Statistical Optics, Addison—Wesley, 1963; Dover, reissued 2003.

Imaging

р. Е Buscher, Practical Optical Interferometry: Imaging at Visible and Infrared Wavelengths, Cam-
bridge University Press, 2015.

A. Donges and R. Noll, Laser Measurement Technology: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer-
Verlag, 2015.

W. Drexler and J. G. Fujimoto, eds., Optical Coherence Tomography: Technology and Applications,
Volumes. 1-3, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2015.

M. C. Teich, B. E. A. Saleh, F. N. C. Wong, and J. H. Shapiro, Variations on the Theme of Quantum
Optical Coherence Tomography: A Review, Quantum Information Processing, vol. 11, pp. 903-
923, 2012.

В. Е. A. Saleh, Introduction to Subsurface Imaging, Cambridge University Press, 2011.

D. J. Brady, Optical Imaging and Spectroscopy, Wiley, 2009.

M.E. Brezinski, Optical Coherence Tomography: Principles and Applications, Academic Press/Elsevier,
2006.

H. H. Barrett and K. J. Myers, Foundations of Image Science, Wiley, 2004.

Random Processes, Random Media, and Speckle

B. Hajek, Random Processes for Engineers, Cambridge University Press, 2015.

V. Krishnan and K. Chandra, Probability and Random Processes, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2015.

R. Ц. Gallager, Stochastic Processes: Theory for Applications, Cambridge University Press, 2014.

H. Pishro-Nik, Introduction to Probability, Statistics, and Random Processes, Kappa Research, 2014.

O. Korotkova, Random Light Beams: Theory and Applications, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2014.

N. Pinel and C. Bourlier, Electromagnetic Wave Scattering from Random Rough Surfaces: Asymptotic
Models, Wiley—-ISTE, 2013.

P. Bajorski, Statistics for Imaging, Optics, and Photonics, Wiley, 2012.

J. W. Goodman, Speckle Phenomena in Optics: Theory and Applications, Roberts, 2007, paperback
ed. 2010.

L. C. Andrews and R. L. Phillips, Laser Beam Propagation through Random Media, SPIE Optical
Engineering Press, 2nd ed. 2005.

A. A. Kokhanovsky, Polarization Optics of Random Media, Springer-Verlag/Praxis, 2003.

A. Papoulis and S. U. Pillai, Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes, McGraw-Hill,
1965, 4th ed. 2002.

B. R. Frieden, Probability, Statistical Optics, and Data Testing: A Problem Solving Approach,
Springer-Verlag, 1983, 3rd ed. 2001.

Н. Е. Rowe, Electromagnetic Propagation in Multi-Mode Random Media, Wiley, 1999.

P. Meinlschmidt, K. D. Hinsch, and R. S. Sirohi, eds., Selected Papers on Electronic Speckle Pat-
tern Interferometry: Principles and Practice, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series
Volume 132), 1996.

R. S. Sirohi, ed., Selected Papers on Speckle Metrology, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 35), 1991.

М. Егапсоп, Laser Speckle and Application in Optics, Academic Press, 1979.

A. Ishimaru, Wave Propagation and Scattering in Random Media, Volume 1 and Volume 2, Academic
Press, 1978; IEEE Press/Oxford University Press, reissued 1997.

512 CHAPTER 12 STATISTICAL OPTICS
PROBLEMS

12.1-4 Lorentzian Spectrum. A light-emitting diode (LED) emits light of Lorentzian spectrum
with a linewidth Av (FWHM) = 1013 Hz centered about a frequency corresponding to a
wavelength A, = 0.7 ит. Determine the linewidth Ал. (in units of nm), the coherence
time те, and the coherence length /.. What is the maximum time delay within which the
magnitude of the complex degree of temporal coherence |9(т)| is greater than 0.5?

12.1-5 Proof of the Wiener—Khinchin Theorem. Use the definitions in (12.1-4), (12.1-14), and
(12.1-15) to prove that the spectral density S(v) is the Fourier transform of the autocorre-
lation function G(r). Prove that the intensity Г is the integral of the power spectral density

12.1-6 Mutual Intensity. The mutual intensity of an optical wave at points on the x axis is given
by

2 2 2
G(a1,22) = Ip exp | exp | ;
where Го, Wo, and ре are constants. Sketch the intensity distribution as a function of x. De-
rive an expression for the normalized mutual intensity g(a, 12) and sketch it as a function
of 21 — 12. What is the physical meaning of the parameters Го, Wo, and ре?

12.1-7 Mutual Coherence Function. An optical wave has a mutual coherence function at points
on the x axis,

2 + 2

G(a1,%2,T) = exp (-5) exp[j27u(21, 22)T] exp || ,
2т2 pe
where u(x1,2%2) = 5 x 10“s~! for x; + 212 > 0, and 6 x 101451 for 21 + 22 < 0, ре =
1 mm, and т. = 1 ps. Determine the intensity, the power spectral density, the coherence
length, and the coherence distance in the transverse plane. Which of these quantities is
position dependent? If this wave were recorded on color film, what would the recorded
image look like?

12.1-8 Coherence Length. Show that light of narrow spectral width has a coherence length [. =
d?/AX, where A. is the linewidth in wavelength units. Show that for light of broad uniform
spectrum extending between the wavelengths Amin and Amax = 2Amin, the coherence length
le = Amax:

12.1-9 Effect of Spectral Width on Spatial Coherence. A point source at the origin (0, 0,0) of
a Cartesian coordinate system emits light with a Lorentzian spectrum and coherence time
Те = 10 ps. Determine an expression for the normalized mutual intensity of the light at the
points (0, 0, d) and (x,0,d), where d = 10 cm. Sketch the magnitude of the normalized
mutual intensity as a function of x.

12.1-10 Gaussian Mutual Intensity. An optical wave in free space has a mutual coherence function

С (га, г, т) = (г: — re) exp(j27197T).

(а) Show that the function J(r) must satisfy the Helmholtz equation V?J + k?J = 0,
where Ао = 2nv9/c.

(b) An approximate solution of the Helmholtz equation is the Gaussian-beam solution

1 jko(a? + у?) ,
(г) = ae) exp Dalz) | exp(—jkoz),

where q(z) = z + 720 and 2 is a constant. This solution has been studied extensively
in Chapter 3 in connection with Gaussian beams. Determine an expression for the
coherence area near the z axis and show that it increases with |z|, so that the wave
gains coherence with propagation away from the origin.

12.2-1 Effect of Spectral Width on Fringe Visibility. Light from a sodium lamp of Lorentzian
spectral linewidth Av = 5 x 101! Hz is used in a Michelson interferometer. Determine the
maximum pathlength difference for which the visibility of the interferogram V > 1.

12.2-2 Number of Observable Fringes in Young’s Interferometer. Determine the number of
observable fringes in Young’s interferometer if each of the sources in Table 12.1-2 is used.
Assume full spatial coherence in all cases.

PROBLEMS 513

12.2-3 Spectrum of a Superposition of Two Waves. An optical wave is a superposition of two

waves U;(t) and U2(t) with identical spectra $;(v) = S2(v), which are Gaussian with

spectral width Av and central frequency мо. The waves are not necessarily uncorrelated.

Determine an expression for the power spectral density S(v) of the superposition U(t) =

U,(t) + Uo(t). Explore the possibility that S(v) is also Gaussian, with a shifted central

frequency v; # vp. If this were possible, our faith in using the Doppler shift as a method to

determine the velocity of stars would be shaken, since frequency shifts could originate from
something other than the Doppler effect.

*12.3-1 Partially Coherent Gaussian Beam. А quasi-monochromatic light wave of wavelength
А travels in free space in the z direction. Its intensity in the z = 0 plane is a Gaussian
function I(x) = Ip exp(—22x?/W@) and its normalized mutual intensity is also a Gaus-
sian function 9(71,22) = exp[—(x1 — 22)? /р?]. Show that the intensity at a distance z
satisfying conditions of the Fraunhofer approximation is also a Gaussian function [,(x) сх
exp[—22? /W?(z)] and derive an expression for the beam width И’ (2) as a function of z and
the parameters Wo, ре, and Л. Discuss the effect of spatial coherence on beam divergence.

*12.3-2 Fourier-Transform Lens. Quasi-monochromatic spatially incoherent light of uniform in-
tensity illuminates a transparency of intensity transmittance f(a, у) and the emerging light
is transmitted between the front and back focal planes of a lens. Determine an expression
for the intensity of the observed light. Compare your results with the case of coherent light
in which the lens performs the Fourier transform (see Sec. 4.2).

*12.3-3 Light from Two-Point Incoherent Source. A spatially incoherent quasi-monochromatic
source of light emits only at two points separated by a distance 2a. Determine an expression
for the normalized mutual intensity at a distance d from the source (use the Fraunhofer
approximation).

*12.3-4 Coherence of Light Transmitted Through a Fourier-Transform Optical System. Light
from a quasi-monochromatic spatially incoherent source with uniform intensity is transmit-
ted through a thin slit of width 2a and travels between the front and back focal planes of a
lens. Determine an expression for the normalized mutual intensity in the back focal plane.

12.4-2 Partially Polarized Light. The intensities of the two components of a partially polarized

wave are I, = Iy = 1, and the argument of the cross-correlation coefficient ду is 7 /2.

(a) Plot the degree of polarization P versus the magnitude of the cross-correlation coeffi-
cient |9 |.

(b) Determine the coherency matrix if P = 0, 0.5, and 1, and describe the nature of the
light in each case.

(c) If the light is transmitted through a polarizer with its axis in the x direction, what is the
intensity of the light transmitted?

CHAPTER
eee
PHOTON OPTICS
13.1 THE PHOTON 516
A. Photon Energy
B. Photon Polarization
C. Photon Position
D. Photon Momentum
E. Photon Interference
F. Photon Time

13.2 PHOTON STREAMS 529
A. Photon Flow
B. Randomness of Photon Flow
C. Photon-Number Statistics
D. Random Partitioning of Photon Streams

*13.3 QUANTUM STATES OF LIGHT 541
A. Coherent States
B. Quadrature-Squeezed States
C. Photon-Number-Squeezed States
D. Two-Photon Light

i

Max Planck (1858-1947) suggested that the Albert Einstein (1879-1955) advanced the

emission and absorption of light by matter hypothesis that light itself comprises quanta of

takes the form of quanta of energy. energy.

Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.

©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

514

CSC
Electromagnetic optics, introduced in Chapter 5, provides the most complete treatment
of light within the confines of classical optics. It encompasses wave optics, which in
turn encompasses ray optics (Fig. 13.0-1). Though classical electromagnetic theory is
capable of providing explanations for the preponderance of effects in optics, as attested
to by the earlier chapters of this book, it nevertheless fails to account for certain optical
phenomena. This failure, which became evident in about 1900, ultimately led to the for-
mulation of a quantum electromagnetic theory known as quantum electrodynamics
(QED). When applied to optical phenomena, QED is usually called quantum optics.
Quantum optics properly describes almost all known optical phenomena.
Quantum Optics
; Figure 13.0-1 The theory of quantum optics
Electromagnetic explains virtually all optical phenomena. It is more
Optics general than electromagnetic optics, which was
Wave Optics shown earlier to encompass wave optics and ray
Ray Optics optics.

In the mathematical framework of quantum electrodynamics, the vectors Е and H
that are used to describe the electric and magnetic fields of classical electromagnetic
optics, respectively, are promoted to operators in a Hilbert space. These operators are
assumed to satisfy certain operator equations and commutation relations that govern
their time dynamics and interdependence. Though the equations of QED describe the
interactions of electromagnetic fields with matter in much the same way as Maxwell’s
equations, QED leads to results that are uniquely quantum in nature. In spite of its
vast successes, quantum optics is nevertheless not the final arbiter of all optical ef-
fects. That distinction currently belongs to the electroweak theory, which combines
quantum electrodynamics with the theory of weak interactions.’ Continuing efforts are
underway to combine electroweak theory with the theories of strong and gravitational
interactions in an attempt to forge a general unified theory that accommodates all four
fundamental forces of nature, as they are currently understood.

This Chapter

A formal treatment of quantum optics is beyond the scope of this book. Nevertheless,
it is possible to describe many of the quantum properties of light, and its interaction
with matter, by supplementing electromagnetic optics with several simple relation-
ships drawn from quantum optics; these embody the corpuscularity, localization, and
fluctuations of quantum fields and energy. This set of rules, which we call photon
optics, permits us to deal with optical phenomena that lie beyond the reach of classical
theory, while retaining classical optics as a limiting case. However, photon optics is not
capable of accommodating all of the optical effects that can be explained by quantum
optics.

In Sec. 13.1 we introduce the concept of the photon and examine its properties.
Using electromagnetic optics as a point of departure, we impose a number of rules that

* For example, parity-nonconserving small rotations of the plane of polarization of light upon passage
through certain materials cannot be accommodated by quantum electrodynamics but are successfully explained by
electroweak theory; see, e.g., P. A. Vetter, D. M. Meekhof, P. K. Majumder, S. K. Lamoreaux, and E. N. Fortson,
Precise Test of Electroweak Theory from a New Measurement of Parity Nonconservation in Atomic Thallium,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 74, pp. 2658—2661, 1995.

515

516 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
govern the behavior of photon energy, polarization, position, momentum, interference,
and time. These rules, which are deceptively simple, form the basis of photon optics
and have far-reaching implications. This is followed, in Sec. 13.2, by a discussion of
the properties of collections of photons and photon streams. The number of photons
emitted by a fixed-intensity light source in a sequence of fixed time intervals is almost
always random, with statistical properties that depend on the nature of the source. The
photon-number statistics for commonly encountered optical sources, such as lasers
and thermal radiators, are set forth. The effect of simple optical components, such
as beamsplitters and filters, on the randomness of photon streams is also examined.
In Sec. 13.3, we study the random fluctuations of the magnitude, phase, and photon
number associated with the electromagnetic field from the perspective of quantum op-
tics. We provide a brief introduction to coherent, quadrature-squeezed, photon-number-
squeezed, and entangled-photon states of light, and indicate several generation mech-
anisms and applications. The interactions of photons with atoms and semiconductors
are described in Secs. 14.3 and 17.2, respectively.

13.1 THE PHOTON
From a quantum perspective, light consists of particles called photons. A photon
carries electromagnetic energy and momentum, as well as intrinsic angular momentum
(or spin) associated with its polarization properties. It can also carry orbital angular
momentum. The photon has zero rest mass and travels at со, the speed of light in
vacuum; its speed in dielectric materials is reduced to с < со. A photon concomitantly
has a wavelike character that determines its localization properties in space and time,
and governs how it interferes and diffracts.

The notion of the photon initially grew out of an attempt by Max Planck in 1900 to
resolve a long-standing conundrum concerning the spectrum of blackbody radiation
emanating from a cavity held at a fixed temperature T (this topic is discussed in
Sec. 14.4B). Planck ultimately resolved the problem by assuming that the allowed
energies of the atoms in the walls of the cavity were quantized to discrete values. In
1905, Albert Einstein proposed that the quantization be imposed directly on the energy
of the electromagnetic radiation, rather than on the atoms, which led to the concept of
the photon. This enabled Einstein to successfully explain the photoelectric effect (this
topic is discussed in Sec. 19.1A). The term “photon” was introduced by Gilbert Lewis
in 1926.

The concept of the photon and the rules of photon optics are introduced by consid-
ering light inside an optical resonator (cavity). This is a convenient choice because it
restricts the space under consideration to a simple geometry. However, the presence of
the resonator turns out not to be an important feature of the argument; the results can
be shown to be independent of the form of the resonator, and even of its presence.
Electromagnetic-Optics Theory of Light т а Resonator
In accordance with electromagnetic optics, light inside a lossless resonator of volume
V is completely characterized by an electromagnetic field that takes the form of a su-
perposition of discrete orthogonal modes of different spatial distributions, different fre-
quencies, and different polarizations. The electric-field vector, E(r,t) = Re{E(r, t)},
can therefore be expressed in terms of the complex electric field E(r, t) via

E(r,t) = У ^ Аа U(r) exp(j2mvqt) Eq. (13.1-1)

а
The qth mode has complex envelope Ag, frequency ка, polarization along the direction
of the unit vector 6, and a spatial distribution characterized by the complex function

134 THEPHOTON 517
Оа(г), which is normalized such that f,,|Ug(r)|? dr = 1. The expansion functions
Ug(r), exp(j2mvqgt), and еа are not unique; other choices are available, including
those comprising polychromatic modes.
In a cubic resonator of dimension d, a convenient choice for the spatial expansion
functions is the set of standing waves
3/2
2 п п п
Ug(r) = | = sin( “2) sin( — ) sin( 72) 13.1-2
q(t) (5) qe Way 477), ( )
where the integers 4х, gy, and 4. are usually specified in the form (4, dy, =) [Зес. 11.3C
and Fig. 13.1-1(а)]. In accordance with (5.4-9), the energy density associated with
mode а is $¢|Aq|* |Uq(r)|?, so that the energy contained in mode q is
1 2 2 1 2
Е = 1 [ Аа Wale)? de = Зач. (131-3)
у
where У is the modal volume. In classical electromagnetic theory, the energy Eg can
assume any nonnegative value, no matter how small, and the total energy is the sum of
the energies in all modes. n n n
3 5
° |
| 5 ‘
'Моае 1 4 3
Г >. йо
= 3
S 1 2
/ 1
PT
Moses a
(a) (b) Mode 1 | Mode 2 Mode 3 ,
Figure 13.1-1 (a) Schematic of three electromagnetic modes of different frequencies and
directions in a cubic resonator. (b) Allowed energy levels of three modes in the context of photon
optics. Modes 1, 2, and 3 have frequencies ил, v2, and из, respectively. In the example presented in
the figure, modes 1, 2, and 3 contain n = 2, 1, and 3 photons, respectively, as represented by the filled
circles.
Photon-Optics Theory of Light in a Resonator
The electromagnetic-optics theory described above is maintained in photon optics, but
a restriction is placed on the energy that each mode is permitted to carry. Rather than
assuming a continuous range, with no minimum allowed value, the modal energy is
restricted to discrete values separated by a fixed energy hv, where и is the frequency
of the mode [Fig. 13.1-1(b)]. The energy of a mode is thus quantized, with only integral
units of this fixed energy permitted. Each unit of energy is carried by a single photon
and the mode may carry an arbitrary number of photons.
Light in a resonator comprises a set of modes, each of which contains an integral
number of identical photons. Characteristics of the mode, such as its frequency,
spatial distribution, direction of propagation, and polarization, are assigned to the
photons.

518 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
A. Photon Energy
Photon optics provides that the energy of an electromagnetic mode is quantized to
discrete levels separated by the energy of a photon [Fig. 13.1-1(6)]. The energy of a
photon in a mode of frequency v is

Е = ри =hw, (13.1-4)

Photon Energy

where h = 6.6261 x 10-34 J-s 15 Planck’s constant and h = h/27. Energy may be
added to, or taken from this mode only in units of hy.

A mode containing zero photons nevertheless carries energy Eg = Три, which is
called the zero-point energy and is associated with the fluctuations of the vacuum
state (Fig. 13.3-3). When it carries n photons, a mode therefore has total energy

E, = (n +5) hy, n=0,1,2,.... (13.1-5)
This expression is identical to that for the energy levels of a quantum-mechanical
harmonic oscillator, as provided in (13.3-4); the connection will be established in
Sec. 13.3. In most experiments, the zero-point energy is not directly observable because
only energy differences [e.g., F2 — E, in (13.1-5)] are measured. However, the zero-
point energy is not innocuous since it constitutes a source of noise (“shot noise’) that
limits the sensitivity of certain precision measurements. This will become evident
in Sec. 13.3B, where we will demonstrate how the vacuum state can be manipu-
lated (“squeezed”) by configuring an experiment in a particular way so as to reduce
the deleterious effects of vacuum-state fluctuations. Zero-point fluctuations are also
responsible for the process of spontaneous emission from an atom, as discussed in
Sec. 14.3. Moreover, are the origin of the Casimir effect, a small attractive force that
acts between two parallel uncharged conducting plates located in close proximity.

The order of magnitude of the photon energy is readily estimated. An infrared pho-
ton of wavelength \, = 1 jum in free space has a frequency и = 3 x 1014 Hz, by virtue
of the relation \,v = со, anda period T = 1/v. Its energy is thus hy = 1.99 х 10719 J.
In units of electron volts, the photon energy becomes hv /e = (1.99 x 10-8) /(1.6 x
10-19) = 1.24 eV; this is equivalent to the kinetic energy imparted to an electron when
it is accelerated through a potential difference of 1.24 V. Another example is provided
by a microwave photon with a wavelength of 1 cm; the photon energy is then 10* times
smaller, namely hy = 1.24 x 10~* eV. A convenient conversion formula between
wavelength (jm) and photon energy (eV) is therefore expressible as

1.24
Е (eV) = ———.. 13.1-6
The reciprocal wavelength is also frequently used as a unit of energy, often in chem-
istry. It is specified in cm~! and is determined by expressing the wavelength in cm
and simply taking the inverse. Thus, 1 cm! corresponds to 1.24/10 000 eV and 1 eV
corresponds to 8065 cm~*. Conversions among photon wavelength, frequency, period,
and energy are illustrated in Fig. 13.1-2.

Because the photon energy increases with frequency, the particle nature of light
becomes increasingly prevalent as the frequency of the radiation increases. X-rays
and gamma-rays almost always behave like particles, and wavelike effects such as
diffraction and interference are difficult to discern. In contrast, radio waves almost
always behave like waves. The frequency of light in the optical region is such that both

134 THEPHOTON 519
particle-like and wavelike behavior are readily observed, thus spurring the need for
photon optics.

ET coc
Wavelenety 10 nm 100 nm 1 т 10 ит 100 zm 1mm lcm 10 cm
Frequency
ОИ RE | . М м м

100 аз 1 fs 10 fs 100 fs lps 10 ps 100 ps Ins
oe “v 100 eV 10 eV leV 100 meV 10 meV 1 meV 100 pueV 10 pueV

=hv
-—|' 10 ат Tal 100 zJ 1027 al 100 УТ 10 yJ Ty)
cm!
10° 10° 104 103 kr 10? 10 1 1071

Figure 13.1-2 Relationships among photon wavelength Ло, frequency и, period T, and energy
Е (specified in units of eV, J, and reciprocal wavelength 1/\, in cm~'). A photon of free-space
wavelength Ло = 1 ит has frequency и = 300 THz, period T = 3.33 fs, and energy Е = 1.24eV=
199 zJ = 10* cm~!. At room temperature (T’ = 300° К), the thermal energy kT’ = 26 meV = 4.17 zJ
= 210 сш` '. Two spectral domains are indicated: 1) optics & photonics, and 2) electronics.
B. Photon Polarization
As indicated earlier, light is characterized by a set of modes of different frequencies,
directions, and polarizations, each occupied by an integral number of photons. For
each monochromatic plane wave traveling in a particular direction, there are two polari-
zation modes. The polarization of a photon is that of the mode it occupies. For example,
the photon may be linearly polarized in the x direction, or right circularly polarized.
Since the polarization modes of free space are degenerate, they are not unique. One
may use modes with linear polarization in the x and y directions, linear polarization in
two other orthogonal directions, say x’ and у’, or right- and left-circular polarizations.
The choice of a particular set is a matter of convenience. A problem arises when a pho-
ton occupying a given mode (say linear polarization in the x direction) is to be observed
in a different set of modes (say linear polarization in the т’ and у’ directions). Since the
photon energy cannot be split between the two modes, a probabilistic interpretation is
called for.

In classical electromagnetic optics, the state of polarization of a plane wave is
described by a Jones vector, whose components (A,, А) are the components of the
complex envelope in the x and y directions, respectively (Sec. 6.1A). The same wave
may also be represented in a different coordinate system (2’, у’), e.g., one that makes
a 45° angle with the initial coordinate system, by a Jones vector with components

Ay = gq (Ac - Ay), Ay = gq (Ac + Ay), (13.1-7)
as described in Sec. 6.1В. Therefore, a wave that is linearly polarized in the x direction
is described Бу a Jones vector with components (Ао, 0) in the х—у coordinate system,
where Ау is the complex envelope. In the (2’, у’) coordinate system, the Jones vector
has components (75 Ао, 55 Ао).

The state of polarization of a single photon is described by a Jones vector with

complex components (A,, A,), normalized such that |A,|? + |A,|? = 1. The

coefficients A, and A, are interpreted as complex probability amplitudes, and
their squared magnitudes, |A,|? and |A,|*, represent the probabilities that the
photon is observed in the x and y linear polarization modes, respectively.

520 — СНАРТЕВ 13 PHOTON OPTICS

The components (A, A,) are transformed from one coordinate system to another
in the same manner as ordinary Jones vectors, and the new components represent
complex probability amplitudes in the new modes. Thus, a single photon may exist,
probabilistically, in more than one mode. This concept is illustrated by the following
examples.
Linearly Polarized Photon
A photon is linearly polarized in the x direction. In terms of the х-у linearly polarized
modes, the photon is described by a Jones vector with components (1,0). In a set
of linearly polarized modes in the x’ and у’ directions at 45°, these components are
(5, в) so that the probabilities of observing the photon in a linear polarization mode
along the x’ or y’ directions are both 1/2 . This is illustrated schematically in Fig. 13.1-3.

x x x’ х
/ | / zt <
One x-polarized photon One x’'-polarized photon One y’-polarized photon
(probability 4 ) (probability 4 )

Figure 13.1-3 A photon in the х linear polarization mode is the same as a photon in a superposition
of the x’ and у’ linear polarization modes, each with probability 1/2.
ини |
EXAMPLE 13.1-1. Transmission of a Linearly Polarized Photon Through a Polarizer.
Consider the transmission of a photon that is linearly polarized in the x direction through a linear
polarizer whose transmission axis is along the x’ direction at an angle 0, as illustrated in Fig. 13.1-
4. The polarizer transmits light that is linearly polarized in the x’ direction but blocks light in
the orthogonal y’ direction. The probability that the photon is transmitted through the polarizer is
determined by writing the Jones vector of the photon polarization state in the x’—y’ coordinate system
as (cos, — sin @) [see (6.1-21) and (6.1-22)]. The probability of observing the photon in the mode
with x’ linear polarization is therefore cos? 0, which represents the probability of passage of the
photon through the polarizer: р(0) = cos? 0. The probability that the photon is blocked is therefore
1 — p(0) = sin? 0. Classical polarization optics reveals that the intensity transmittance of a polarizer
in this same configuration is cos? 9 (Prob. 6.1-7). We conclude that the probability of transmission of
a single photon is identical to the classical transmittance, i.e., р(0) = T(0).

й 9 pO)

1 Figure 13.1-4 Probability of a
linearly polarized photon passing
through a polarizer. The axis of
the polarizer is at an angle 9 with

У о г г respect to the photon polarization.
Polarizer
ини |

134 ТНЕРНОТОМ 521
Circularly Polarized Photon
A circularly polarized photon is described by a Jones vector that has components
a (1, +7), where the + and — signs correspond to right- and left-handed polarization,
respectively. This description is based on an x—y coordinate system, i.e., linearly polar-
ized modes. Therefore, the probability of the photon passing through a linear polarizer
pointing in either the x or y direction is 1/2. It can also be shown that this result prevails
whatever the direction of the linear polarizer. The circularly polarized photon may
be regarded as equivalent to the probabilistic superposition of one photon with linear
polarization in the x direction and another in the y direction, each with probability 1/2.
Right- and left-circular polarizations may also be used as modes (as a coordinate
system). In that description, a linearly polarized photon may be regarded as a proba-
bilistic superposition of right- and left-circularly polarized photons, each with proba-
bility 1/2, as illustrated in Fig. 13.1-5.
Xx xX xX
= OR
У У У
One LP photon One RCP photon One LCP photon
(probability у) (probability 2)
Figure 13.1-5 A linearly polarized photon is equivalent to the superposition of a right- and a
left-circularly polarized photon, each with probability 1/2.
C. Photon Position
Associated with each photon of frequency и is a wave described by the complex
wavefunction U(r) exp(j27vt) of the mode. However, when a photon impinges on
a detector of small area dA located normal to the direction of propagation, at the
position r, its indivisibility causes it to be either wholly detected or not detected at
all. The location at which the photon is registered is not precisely determined. Rather,
it is governed by the optical intensity Г(г) сх |U(r)|?, in accordance with the following
probabilistic law:
The probability p(r) dA of observing a photon at the position r within an incre-
mental area dA, at any time, is proportional to the local optical intensity I(r) «
U(r)|?, so that
| р(г) dA х I(r) dA. (13.1-8)
Photon Position
The photon is therefore more likely to be found at those locations where the intensity is
high. A photon in a mode described by a standing wave with the intensity distribution
I(x,y,z) < sin?(rz/d), where 0 < z < d, for example, is most likely to be
detected at z = d/2, but will never be detected at z = 0 or z = d. In contrast
to waves, which are extended in space, and particles, which are localized in space,
optical photons behave as extended and localized entities. This behavior is called
wave-particle duality. The localized nature of photons becomes evident when they
are detected.

522 — СНАРТЕВ 13 PHOTON OPTICS
ee
EXERCISE 13.1-1

Photon in a Gaussian Beam.

(a) Consider a single photon described by a Gaussian beam (the 'ТЕМо,о mode of a spherical-mirror
resonator; see Secs. 3.1B, 5.4A, and 11.2B). What is the probability of detecting the photon at a
point within a circle whose radius is the waist radius of the beam Wo? Recall from (3.1-12) that
at the waist, I(p, z = 0) ох exp(—2p?/W(), where р is the radial coordinate.

(b) If the beam carries a large number n of independent photons, estimate the average number of
photons that lie within this circle.

ee

Transmission of a Single Photon Through a Beamsplitter

An ideal beamsplitter is an optical device that losslessly splits a beam of light into two

beams that emerge at right angles. It is characterized by an intensity transmittance J

and an intensity reflectance Х = 1—‘. The intensity of the transmitted wave J; and the

intensity of the reflected wave J, can be calculated from the intensity of the incident

wave I using the electromagnetic relations Г, = TI and Г. = (1 — Т)Г.

Because a photon is indivisible, it must choose between the two possible directions
permitted by the beamsplitter. A single photon incident on the device will follow
these directions in accordance with the probabilistic photon-position rule (13.1-8). The
probability that the photon is transmitted is proportional to Г, and is therefore equal to
the transmittance J = I; /I. The probability that it is reflected is 1 — TJ = [,./I. From
the point of view of probability, the problem is identical to that of flipping a biased
coin. Figure 13.1-6 illustrates the process.

Beamsplitter
Figure 13.1-6 Probabilistic reflection or
One Proton transmission of a photon at a lossless beam-
One photon (probability 7) splitter.
One photon
(probability R= 1-7)

Single-Photon Imaging

As described in Sec. 4.4 and in (A.3-3) of Appendix A, a coherent imaging system is

characterized by an impulse response function h(x, y; x’, y’) that links its output and

input fields, U,(x, у) and U;(z, у), respectively, via the two-dimensional convolution
oe)
U,(2,y) = Ш U;(2',y') h(a, y; 2", у) da’ dy’. (13.1-9)
—с

The very same relationship characterizes the single-photon wavefunctions at the output

and input of a single-photon imaging system, where |U,(x)|? represents the probability

density function of the photon position in the image plane.

13.1 THEPHOTON 523
D. Photon Momentum
In classical electromagnetic optics, as discussed in Sec. 5.4A, an electromagnetic plane
wave carries a linear momentum density (W/c)k, where W is the energy density (per
unit volume) and k is a unit vector in the direction of the wavevector k.

In photon optics, the linear momentum of a photon is р = (E/c)k where Е = hw =
hck is the photon energy, so that:

The linear momentum associated with a photon in a plane-wave mode of wave-

ЯНЬ p = hk. (13.1-10)

Photon Momentum

The magnitude of the momentum is р = hk = hw/c = h27/), so that

p=E/c=h/d. (13.1-11)
*Momentum of a Localized Wave
A wave more general than a plane wave, with a complex wavefunction of the form
U(r) exp(j2avt), can be expanded as a sum of plane waves of different wavevectors
by using the techniques of Fourier optics (Chapter 4). The component with wavevector
К may be written in the form A(k) exp(—jk-r) exp(j27vt), where A(k) is its ampli-
tude.

The momentum of a photon described by an arbitrary complex wavefunction

U(r) exp(j27t) is uncertain. It assumes the value

p =k, (13.1-12)
with probability proportional to |A(k)|?, where A(k) is the amplitude of the

plane-wave Fourier component of U(r) with wavevector k.

If f(x, у) = U(a, у, 0) is the complex amplitude at the z = 0 plane, the plane-wave
Fourier component with wavevector К = (kz,k,,kz) has an amplitude A(k) =
F(kz/20, ky/2m), where Е(иь,ы,) is the two-dimensional Fourier transform of
f(x,y), as described in Chapter 4. Because the functions f(x,y) and Е(ы,, vy)
form a Fourier transform pair, their widths are inversely related and satisfy the
position—direction relation provided in (A.2-6) of Appendix A. The uncertainty relation
between the position of the photon and the direction of its momentum is established
because the position of the photon at the z = 0 plane is probabilistically determined
by |U(r)|? = |f(a,y)|?, and the direction of its momentum is probabilistically
determined by |A(k)|? = |F'(k,/27,k,/27)|?. Thus if, at the plane z = 0, oy is
the positional uncertainty in the x direction, and од = sin '(ок,/К) = (A/27) one
is the angular uncertainty about the z axis (which is assumed to be < 1), then the
uncertainty relation 0,042 > 1/2 is equivalent to ооо > А/4т.

A plane-wave photon has a known momentum (fixed direction and magnitude), so
that og = 0, but its position is totally uncertain (о. = со); it is equally likely to be
detected anywhere in the z = 0 plane. When a plane-wave photon passes through an
aperture, its position becomes localized at the expense of a spread in the direction of
its momentum. The position—direction uncertainty of the photon therefore parallels the
theory of diffraction described in Sec. 4.3. At the other extreme from the plane wave is
the spherical-wave photon. It is well localized in position (at the center of the wave),
but the direction of its momentum is totally uncertain.

524 — СНАРТЕВ 13 PHOTON OPTICS
Radiation Pressure
Because a photon carries momentum, and momentum is conserved, the atom emitting
the photon experiences a recoil of magnitude hv /c. The momentum associated with
a photon can also be transferred to an object, giving rise to a force that results in
mechanical motion. As an example, light beams can be used to deflect atomic beams
or to contain collections of atoms or small dielectric particles (Sec. 14.3F). The term
radiation pressure is often used to describe this phenomenon (pressure = force /area).
НИ
EXERCISE 13.1-2
Photon-Momentum Recoil. Determine the recoil velocity imparted to a 1*8Hg atom that emits
a photon of energy 4.88 eV. Compare this with the root-mean-square thermal velocity v of the atom at
a temperature Г = 300° К (this is obtained by setting the average kinetic energy equal to the average
thermal energy, ту? = ЗКТ, where К = 1.38 x 10-23 J/K is Boltzmann’s constant).
ee
Photon Spin Angular Momentum
The intrinsic spin angular momentum of a photon associated with circular polari-
zation is characterized by an electric-field vector that rotates in a circle normal to the
direction of propagation. Because the photon travels at the speed of light, the projection
of its spin vector lies either parallel or antiparallel to the wavevector, so that its helicity
is quantized to two values,
$ = +h, (13.1-13)
Photon Spin
where the plus (minus) signs are associated with right-handed (left-handed) circular
polarization, respectively. Linearly polarized photons have equal probability of exhibit-
ing parallel and antiparallel spin. Just as photons can transfer linear momentum to an
object, so too can circularly polarized photons exert a torque on an object. A circularly
polarized photon will, for example, exert a torque on a half-wave plate.
Bosons and fermions. Fundamental particles are divided into two broad classes:
Bosons, such as photons and other force-carrier particles, have a spin that is an integer
multiple of Й, as do quasiparticles such as plasmons, polaritons, and phonons. In
contrast fermions, such as electrons, protons, neutrons, and other material particles,
have a spin that is а half-integer multiple of h.
Photon Orbital Angular Momentum
Aside from the spin angular momentum associated with polarization, an electromag-
netic wave may carry angular momentum by virtue of the twisting of its wavefront
about the axis of propagation. For example, the Laguerre-Gaussian beam described
by the complex wavefunction U;,(p, ¢, =) in (3.4-1), which has an azimuthal phase
dependence exp(—jl@) and therefore a helical wavefront, has an angular momentum
(for [ 52 0) that is independent of its state of polarization. To distinguish this from spin
angular momentum, it is referred to as orbital angular momentum. A photon in such
a spatial mode possesses an orbital angular momentum L = Jh.
Another example is provided by a photon in a whispering-gallery mode (WGM) of
a cylindrical resonator (Sec. 11.3B). In the context of ray optics, the mode is described
by a ray tracing the cross-sectional circular boundary of the resonator. In the context of
wave optics, the wavelength satisfies the resonance condition 27a = qA, where a is the

134 THEPHOTON 525
radius of the circle and 4 = 1, 2,.... The linear momentum of the photon is р = Rk =
h2n/X = qh/a, and its angular momentum is therefore ap = qi. Similarly, a photon
in a WGM mode of a microsphere resonator (Sec. 11.4C) of radius а has an angular
momentum L = 6й, where the integer @ is associated with the resonance wavelength
for an optical path that traces a great circle. The quantity @ may be regarded as an
angular-momentum quantum number similar to that used to describe the hydrogen
atom (Sec. 14.1А).

E. Photon Interference

Young’s double-pinhole interference experiment is generally invoked to demonstrate
the wave nature of light (Exercise 2.5-2). In fact, Young’s experiment can be carried out
even when there is only a single photon in the apparatus at a given time. The outcome
of this experiment can be understood in the context of photon optics by using the
photon-position rule. The intensity at the observation plane is calculated using wave
optics and the result is converted to a probability density function that specifies the
random position of the detected photon. The interference arises from phase differences
associated with the two possible paths.

Consider a plane wave illuminating a screen with two pinholes separated by a
distance 2a, as portrayed in Fig. 13.1-7 (see also Fig. 2.5-6). The line joining the holes
defines the x axis. Two spherical waves are generated that interfere at the observation
plane. As is understood from Exercise 2.5-2, in the paraboloidal-wave approximation,
these give rise to a sinusoidal intensity that behaves in accordance with

2150
I(x) = 20 (1 + cos ~~) . (13.1-14)
Here J is the intensity of each of the waves individually at the observation plane, A
is the wavelength, and @ is the angle subtended by the two pinholes at the observation
plane (Fig. 13.1-7). The result provided in (13.1-14) describes the intensity pattern that
is experimentally observed for classical light.
А
< Single
photon
9= 24 | —>
т ,
— N 7) ‘ x =
<= № = | —
е . а | |
Screen
Observation —_ Probability
plane
Figure 13.1-7 Young’s double-pinhole experiment with a single photon. The interference pattern
I(x) determines the probability density of detecting the photon at position x.

Now, if only a single photon is present in the apparatus, in accordance with (13.1-8)
the probability of detecting it at position x is proportional to I(x). It is most likely
to be detected at those values of x for which I(x) is a maximum and it will never

526 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS

be detected at values of x for which I(a) = 0. If a histogram of the locations of
the detected photon is constructed by repeating the experiment many times, as Taylor
did in 1909, the classical interference pattern obtained by carrying out the experiment
only once with a strong beam of light emerges. The classical interference pattern does
indeed represent the probability density of the position at which a single photon is
observed.

The occurrence of the interference is a result of the extended nature of the photon,
which permits it to pass through both holes of the apparatus. This endows the photon
with knowledge of the geometry of the entire experiment when it reaches the observa-
tion plane, where it is detected as a single entity. If one of the holes were to be covered,
the interference pattern would disappear.
НИ
EXERCISE 13.1-3
Single Photon in a Mach-Zehnder Interferometer. Consider a plane wave of light of
wavelength Л that is split into two parts at a beamsplitter (Sec. 13.1C) and recombined in a Mach—
Zehnder interferometer, as shown in Fig. 13.1-8 [see also Fig. 2.5-3(a)]. If the wave contains only a
single photon, plot the probability of finding it at the detector as a function of d/X (for 0 < d/X < 1),
where d is the difference between the two optical paths of the light. Assume that the mirrors and
beamsplitters are perfectly flat and lossless, and that the beamsplitters have J = R = 1/2. Where
might the photon be located when the probability of finding it at the detector is not unity?

Photon

—_ > —_>

Figure 13.1-8 Single photon in a
Detector Mach-Zehnder interferometer.
—>
— K

ee
F. Photon Time
The modal expansion provided in (13.1-1) comprises monochromatic modes that are
“eternal” harmonic functions of time; a photon in a monochromatic mode is equally
likely to be detected at any time. As indicated earlier, however, a modal expansion of
the radiation inside (or outside) a resonator is not unique. A more general expansion
comprises polychromatic modes such as time-localized wavepackets (Sec. 2.6A). The
probability of detecting a photon described by the complex wavefunction U(r, t), at
any position and in the incremental time interval between ¢ and $ + dt, is proportional
to I(r,t) dt « |U(r,t)|? dt. The photon-position rule of photon optics presented in
(13.1-8) may therefore be generalized to include photon time localization:

The probability p(r, t) dA dt of observing a photon at position г within an incre-

mental area dA, and during an incremental time interval dt following time %, is

proportional to the optical intensity of the mode at г and $, 1.е.,

p(x, t) dAdt x I(r,t) dAdt x |U(r, t)|? dA dt. (13.1-15)
Photon Position and Time

134 THEPHOTON 527
Time—Energy Uncertainty
The time during which a photon in a monochromatic mode of frequency и may be
detected is totally uncertain, whereas the value of its frequency v (and its energy hv)
is absolutely certain. In contrast, a photon in a wavepacket mode with an intensity
function I(t) of duration о; must be localized within this time. Bounding the photon
time in this way engenders an uncertainty in its frequency (and energy) by virtue
of the properties of the Fourier transform, and the result is a polychromatic photon.
Suppressing the r dependence for simplicity, the frequency uncertainty is readily deter-
mined by carrying out a Fourier-transform expansion of U(£) in terms of its harmonic
components,
CoO
U(t) = ] V(v) exp(j2mvt) ар, (13.1-16)
—со
where У (v) is the Fourier transform of 0 ($) (Sec. А.1 of Appendix А). The width o,
of |V(v)|? represents the spectral width. If o; is the power-RMS width of the func-
tion |U(t)|?, then o; and o,, must satisfy the duration—bandwidth reciprocity relation
бьб+ > 1/47 or, equivalently, оо > 1/2 (the definitions of o; and о’, that lead to this
uncertainty relation are provided in Sec. A.2 of Appendix A).

The energy of the photon fw cannot then be specified to an accuracy better than
СЕ = ho... It follows that the energy uncertainty of a photon, and the time during
which it may be detected, must satisfy

h
СЕД+ > р (13.1-17)
Time—Energy Uncertainty
which is known as the time—energy uncertainty relation. This relation is analogous
to that between position and wavenumber (momentum), which sets a limit on the
precision with which the position and momentum of a photon can be simultaneously
specified. The average energy Е of this polychromatic photon is Е = hy = hw.

To summarize: a monochromatic photon (a, — 0) has an eternal duration within
which it can be observed (0; — со). In contrast, a photon associated with an optical
wavepacket is localized in time and is thus polychromatic with a corresponding energy
uncertainty. Thus, a wavepacket photon can be viewed as a confined traveling packet
of energy.
НИ
EXERCISE 13.1-4
Single Photon т a Gaussian Wavepacket. Consider a plane-wave wavepacket (Sec. 2.6А)
containing a single photon traveling in the z direction, with complex wavefunction

z
U(r, t) = a(t - =) (13.1-18)
where
р
a(t) =ехр| —-— | exp(j2mvot). (13.1-19)
4т2
(a) Show that the uncertainties in its time and z position are о; = т and о, = соъ, respectively.

528 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
(b) Show that the uncertainties in its energy and momentum satisfy the minimum uncertainty rela-
tions:
ceo, = 8/2 (13.1-20)
O20y = 6/2. (13.1-21)
Equation (13.1-21) is the minimum-uncertainty limit of the Heisenberg position-momentum
uncertainty relation provided in (A.2-7) of Appendix A.
НИ
Summary
Electromagnetic radiation may be described in terms of a sum of modes, e.g.,
monochromatic uniform plane waves of the form
E(r,t) = У` Ag exp(—jkg - г) exp(j2mVqt) eq. (13.1-22)
а
Each plane wave has two orthogonal polarization states (e.g., vertical/horizontal
linearly polarized, right/left circularly polarized) represented by the vectors €g.
When the energy of a mode is measured, the result is an integer (in general,
random) number of energy quanta (photons). Each of the photons associated with
the mode q has the following properties:
и Energy Е = hig.
= Momentum р = ЙКа.
= Helicity (spin angular momentum) S = +A, if it is circularly polarized.
= The photon is equally likely to be found anywhere in space, and at any time,
since the wavefunction of the mode is a monochromatic plane wave.
The choice of modes is not unique. A modal expansion in terms of non-
monochromatic (quasi-monochromatic), non-plane waves, is also possible:
E(r,t) = > > Ag Оа(т, t) га. (13.1-23)
а
Each of the photons associated with the mode q then has the following properties:
= The photon position and time are governed by the complex wavefunction
Ug(r,t). The probability of observing the photon at position г within an
incremental area dA, and during an incremental time interval dt following
time t, is proportional to |Uq(r, t)|? dA dt.
= If Ug(r,t) has a finite time duration o;, 1.е., if the photon is localized in time,
then the photon energy hvg has an uncertainty ho, > h/4ro;.
= If Uq(r, $) has а finite spatial extent in the transverse (= = 0) plane, 1.е., if the
photon is localized in the x direction, for example, then the direction of photon
momentum is uncertain. The spread in photon momentum can be determined
by analyzing Uq(r,t) as a sum of plane waves, the wave with wavevector К
corresponding to photon momentum hk. Spatial localization of the photon in
the transverse plane results in an increase in the uncertainty of the photon-
momentum direction.

13.2 PHOTONSTREAMS 529
13.2 PHOTON STREAMS

In Sec. 13.1 we concentrated on the properties and behavior of single photons. We
now consider the properties of collections of photons. As a result of the processes by
which photons are created (e.g., atomic emissions, as discussed in Chapter 14), the
number of photons occupying any mode is generally random. Photon streams often
contain numerous propagating modes, each carrying a random number of photons. If
an experiment is carried out in which a weak stream of photons falls on a photosensitive
surface, the individual photons are registered (detected) at random localized instants of
time and at random points in space, in accordance with (13.1-15). (This space-time
process can be discerned by viewing a barely illuminated object with the naked, dark-
adapted eye.)

The temporal and spatial behavior of the photon registrations can be examined
individually. The temporal pattern can be highlighted by making use of a detector
that integrates light over a finite area A, but has good temporal resolution (e.g., a
photodiode), as illustrated in Fig. 13.2-1. According to (13.1-15), the probability of
detecting a photon in the incremental time interval between ¢ and t + dt is proportional
to P(t) = ] al (x,t) dA, which is the optical power at time ¢. The photons are registered
at random times.

WI Figure 13.2-1 Photon registrations at

ИИ random localized instants of time for а

Light Detector ! detector that integrates light over an area А.
Oscilloscope

The spatial pattern of photon registrations, on the other hand, is readily manifested

by making use of a detector that integrates light over a fixed exposure time T but
has good spatial resolution (e.g., photographic film). In accordance with (13.1-15), the
probability of detecting a photon in an incremental area dA surrounding the point r is
then proportional to fy I(r, t) dt, which is the integrated local intensity. The photons
are registered at random locations, as illustrated by the grainy image of Max Planck
provided in Fig. 13.2-2. This image was obtained by rephotographing, under very low
light conditions, the image of Max Planck presented on page 514. Each white dot in the
photograph represents a random photon registration; the density of these registrations
follows the local intensity.
4 ae г: Figure 13.2-2 Random photon registrations exhibit a
a р ЕР Е spatial density that follows the local optical intensity.
a € к. Pg This image of Max Planck, illuminated by a sparse
о р Pa ig & stream of photons, should be compared with that on
ey ie, Ripon . ah page 514, illuminated with high-intensity light.

530 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
A. Photon Flow
We begin by introducing a number of definitions that relate the mean flow of photons
to classical electromagnetic intensity, power, and energy. These definitions are inspired
by (13.1-15), which dictates the position and time at which a single-photon detection
occurs. We then turn to randomness in the photon flow and consider the photon-number
statistics for different sources of light. Finally, we consider the random partitioning of
a photon stream by a beamsplitter or photodetector.
Mean Photon-Flux Density
Monochromatic light of frequency и and constant classical intensity I(r) (watts /cm?)
carries a mean photon-flux density
I(r
g(r) = Це) (13.2-1)
hy Mean Photon-Flux Density
Since each photon carries energy hv, this equation provides a straightforward conver-
sion from a classical measure (units of energy /s-cm?) into a quantum measure (units
of photons /s-cm?). For quasi-monochromatic light of central frequency 7, all photons
have approximately the same energy Av, so that the mean photon-flux density can be
approximately expressed as I(r)
г) = ——. 13.2-2
o(r) & 5 (13.2.2)
Typical values of ¢(r) for some commonly encountered sources of light are provided
in Table 13.2-1. It is clear from these numbers that trillions of photons rain down on
each square centimeter of us each second.
Table 13.2-1 Mean photon-flux density for various sources of light.
Source Mean Photon-Flux Density
(photons/s-cm?)
Starlight 10°
Moonlight 108
Twilight 1010
Indoor light 1012
Sunlight 104
Laser light® 1022
ЧА 10-mW He-Ne laser beam at Ло = 633 nm focused to а 20-ит-Фатеег spot.
Mean Photon Flux
The mean photon flux ® (units of photons/s) is obtained by integrating the mean
photon-flux density over a specified area,
P
d= | o(r)dA=—, (13.2-3)
A hv Mean Photon Flux
where the optical power (watts) is defined as
P= ] п) dA (13.2-4)
A

13.2 PHOTON STREAMS 531
and hv is again the average energy of a photon. As an example, 1 nW of optical
power at a wavelength A, = 0.2 wm delivers to an object an average photon flux
Ф = 10° photons/s. Roughly speaking, one photon thus strikes the object every
nanosecond, 1.е.,

1nW at A, = 0.2 им = 1 photon/ns. (13.2-5)
A photon of wavelength 1, = 1 um carries one-fifth as much energy, in which case
1 nW corresponds to an average of 5 photons/ns.
Mean Number of Photons
The mean number of photons 7 detected in the area A and in the time interval T
is obtained by multiplying the mean photon flux Ф in (13.2-3) by the time duration,
whereupon Е
п=ФТ=—, (13.2-6)
hv Mean Photon Number
where Е = РТ 1$ the optical energy (joules).
To summarize, the relations between the classical and quantum measures of pho-
ton flow are:
Classical Quantum
Optical intensity I(r) Photon-flux density @(r) = I(r)/hv
Optical power Р Photon flux Ф =P/hi
Optical energy E Photon number п =E/hv
Spectral Densities
For polychromatic light of nonnegligible bandwidth, it is useful to define spectral
densities of the classical intensity, power, and energy, and their respective quantum
counterparts: spectral photon-flux density, spectral photon flux, and spectral photon
number:
Classical Quantum
Г, (W/cm?-Hz) фь = I,/hv (photons /s-cm?-Hz)
P, (W/Hz) ®,=P,/hv  (photons/s-Hz)
Е, (J/Hz) ny,=E,/hv (photons/Hz)
As an example, P,, dv represents the optical power in the frequency range between
и/ and и + dv while ®, dv represents the flux of photons in that frequency range.

532 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
Time-Varying Light
If the light intensity is time varying, it follows that the mean photon-flux density given
in (13.2-1) is a function of time, 1.е.,
I(xr,t
o(r,t) = Fed) (13.2-7)
hv Mean Photon-Flux
The mean photon flux and optical power are then also functions of time, Density
P(t
H(t) = ] o(r,t) dA = РФ, (13.2-8)
А hy Mean Photon Flux
where
P(t) = [re dA. (13.2-9)
A
Consequently, the mean number of photons registered in a time interval between $ = 0
and T, which is obtained by integrating the photon flux, also varies with time,
т Е
п = ] ФВ dt = —, (13.2-10)
0 hv Mean Photon Number
where the mean optical energy (intensity integrated over time and area) is given by
T T
E - | P(t) dt = ] ] ке, dAdt. (13.2-11)
0 о JA
B. Randomness of Photon Flow
When the classical intensity I(r, t) is constant, the time and position at which a single
photon is detected are governed by (13.1-15), which provides that the probability
density of detecting that photon at the space-time point (г, $) is proportional to I(r, t).
The classical electromagnetic intensity I(r, t) governs the behavior of photon streams
as well as single photons, but the interpretation ascribed to I(r, t) differs:
For photon streams, the classical intensity I(r,t) determines the mean photon-
flux density $(x,t). The fluctuations of (x,t) are determined by the properties
of the light source that emits the photons.
Consider a detector that integrates over space, such as that illustrated in Fig. 13.2-1.
If the intensity J is constant in time, then so too is the power P. The mean photon-flux
density is then ф = I/hv and the mean photon flux is Ф = P/hv. Nevertheless, the
times at which the photons arrive are random, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 13.2-
3(a); the statistical properties are determined by the nature of the source emitting the
photons, as set forth in Sec. 13.2C. An example of how random photon arrivals might
arise may be understood from the following example. Consider a source of optical
power P = 1 nW that emits at a wavelength A, = 1 ym so it delivers an average
photon flux of Ф = 5 photons/ns or 0.005 photons/ps. Since only integral numbers of
photons may be detected, this signifies that if 10° time intervals are examined, each of
duration T = 1 ps, then most intervals will be empty (zero photons will be registered),
about 500 intervals will contain one photon, and very few intervals will contain two or
more photons.
If the optical power P(t) does vary with time, the mean density of photon detections
will follow the function P(t), as schematically illustrated in Fig. 13.2-3(b). The mean

13.2 PHOTON STREAMS 533
photon flux ®(t) = P(t) /hv accommodates the fact that there are more photon arrivals
when the power is large than when it is small. This variation is in addition to the
fluctuations in photon occurrence times associated with the character of the source.

PC) р |

a5 3 5
ЕЕ 58. И\—_
oa
Е 2
Photon Photon
arrivals > arrivals | Ш Е В,
t t
(a) (b)
Figure 13.2-3 (a) Constant optical power and a sample function of the randomly arriving photons,
whose statistical properties are determined by the nature of the source. (b) Time-varying optical power
and a sample function of the randomly arriving photons, whose statistical properties are determined
both by the fluctuations of the optical power and by the nature of the source, as considered in
Sec. 13.2C.

The image of Max Planck in Fig. 13.2-2 illustrates analogous behavior in the spatial
domain. The locations of the detected photons generally follow the classical intensity
distribution, with a high photon density where the intensity is large and a low photon
density where the intensity is small. But there is considerable graininess (noise) in
the image corresponding to the fluctuations in photon occurrence positions associated
with the source of illumination. These fluctuations are most discernible when the mean
photon-flux density is small, as is the case in Fig. 13.2-2. When the mean photon-flux
density becomes large everywhere, as it is in the image of Max Planck on page 514,
the graininess disappears and the classical intensity distribution is recovered.

C. Photon-Number Statistics

An understanding of photon-number statistics is important for applications such as the
reduction of noise in weak images and the optimization of optical information trans-
mission. In an optical fiber communications system, for example, information is carried
in the form of pulses of light (Chapter 25). Only the mean number of photons per pulse
is controllable at the source; the actual number of photons emitted is unpredictable and
varies from pulse to pulse, resulting in errors in the transmission of information.

The statistical distribution of the number of photons depends on the nature of the
light source and must generally be treated in the context of quantum optics, as de-
scribed briefly in Sec. 13.3. Under certain conditions, however, the arrival of photons
may be regarded as the independent occurrences of a sequence of random events at a
rate equal to the photon flux, which is proportional to the optical power. The optical
power may be deterministic (as with coherent light) or a time-varying random process
(as with partially coherent light). For partially coherent light (Chapter 12), the power
fluctuations are correlated, so that the photon arrivals will no longer form a sequence
of independent events and the photon statistics are significantly altered.

Coherent Light

Coherent light has constant optical power P. The corresponding mean photon flux
® = P/hi (photons/s) is also constant, but the actual photon registration times are
random, as portrayed schematically in Fig. 13.2-4. Given a time interval of duration Т,
called the counting time, let the n signify the number of detected photons, called the
photon number. We already know from (13.2-6) that the mean photon number is
п = ФГ = PT/hv. We now seek to establish the photon-number distribution p(n),
i.e., the probability p(0) of detecting zero photons, the probability p(1) of detecting
one photon, etc., in the counting time T.

534 CHAPTER13 PHOTON OPTICS
n=9 n=8 n=7 n=11
T T T T '
Figure 13.2-4 Random arrival of photons for a coherent light source of power Р. Consecutive
counting times of duration T are indicated. Though the optical power is constant, the photon number
n observed in each counting time is random.

An expression for the photon-number distribution, p(n) vs. п, suitable for coherent
light can be derived under the assumption that the photon registrations are statistically
independent events, as derived below. The result, known as the Poisson distribution,
takes the form

n” exp(—n
p(n) = пех), п=0,1,2,.... (13.2-12)
п. Poisson Distribution
Equation (13.2-12) is displayed on a semilogarithmic plot in Fig. 13.2-5 for several
values of the mean photon number п.
1
p(n) у
р Ао
10-3 /\
0 5 10 15 20
n
Figure 13.2-5 Semilogarithmic plot of the Poisson photon-number distribution, p(n) vs. п, for
several values of the mean photon number п. The curves become progressively broader as п increases.

The Poisson photon-number distribution is suitable for describing the photon statis-
tics of the coherent light emitted by an ideal, amplitude-stabilized, single-mode laser
operated well above its threshold of oscillation (Chapter 16). This same result emerges
in the context of quantum optics (Sec. 13.3A). Moreover, the Poisson distribution
provides a good approximation for describing the photon statistics of a number of
other sources of light, such as multimode thermal light.

С] Derivation of the Poisson Distribution. Divide the time interval T shown in Fig. 13.2-4 into
a large number N of subintervals, each of sufficiently short duration T/N such that each subinterval
carries one photon with probability р = n/N and zero photons with probability 1 —р. The probability
of finding п independent photons in the N subintervals, like the flips of a biased coin, then follows
the binomial distribution:

м!
(о) = Ия" И 2) |
м! п \ nv 0 мг
Е] (1-_
меняй (м) (1-м) т
In the limit as the number of subintervals N — со, we have N!/(N—n)!N" 3 1, (1—7/N)~" > 1,
and (1 — n/N)" — exp(—n), which yields (13.2-12). a

13.2 PHOTON STREAMS 535
Photon-Number Mean and Variance
The mean and variance are typically used to characterize a random variable. The mean
photon number is expressed as
Co
n= У np(n), (13.2-13)
n=0
while the variance, which is the average of the squared deviation from the mean, is
given by
ор =» (п-т)? p(n). (13.2-14)
n=0
The standard deviation o,, which is the square root of the variance, is a measure of the
width of the distribution. The quantities p(n), п, and o, are collectively called photon-
number statistics. Though the distribution p(n) contains information beyond the mean
and variance, these two parameters provide a rough outline of its nature.

It is not difficult to show, by inserting (13.2-12) into (13.2-13) and (13.2-14), that
the mean of the Poisson distribution is indeed n and that its variance is equal to its
mean:

of =n. (13.2-15)
Variance
Poisson Distribution
Taking п = 100, for example, the standard deviation is о„ = 10, which signifies that
the observation of 100 photons on average is accompanied by an uncertainty of roughly
+10 photons.
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Photon-number randomness constitutes a fundamental source of noise that must be
contended with when using light to transmit a signal. A useful measure of the perfor-
mance of an information transmission system is the photon-number-based signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR). Representing the signal by its mean 7, and the noise by its standard
deviation o,, the SNR is defined as > р
теап п
SNR = (mean п. (13.2-16)
variance 0:
If the light obeys Poisson photon-number statistics, then о? = п from (13.2-15), so
that
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Poisson Distribution
The Poisson signal-to-noise ratio increases linearly with the mean photon number.

Though the SNR is a useful measure of the randomness of a signal, in some appli-
cations it is necessary to make use of the full probability distribution. For example, an
important measure of the performance of a digital fiber optic communications system
is the probability of error. If such a system is used to transmit information using bits
with a mean photon number of, say 7 = 20, (13.2-12) dictates that the probability of no
photons being received is р(0) = 2 x 10-9. Since the receipt of zero photons represents
an error, as discussed in Sec. 25.2B, the full probability distribution is required to
calculate system performance.

536 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
Thermal Light
When the photon arrival times are not independent, as is the case for thermal light, the
photon-number statistics differ from Poisson. Thermal light is generated in an optical
resonator whose walls are maintained at a fixed temperature T’ and whose atoms emit
photons into the modes of the resonator. In accordance with the laws of statistical
mechanics under conditions of thermal equilibrium, the probability of occupancy of
energy level E, in a system satisfies the Boltzmann probability distribution
[51
P(E,) хехр|  -—— |. (13.2-18)
kT Boltzmann Distribution
This exponential distribution is sketched in Fig. 13.2-6 with P(E,) plotted along the
abscissa. The occupancy of each energy level is random and higher energies are rel-
atively less probable than lower energies. The distribution is parameterized by kT,
where К is Boltzmann’s constant (К = 1.38 x 10-23 J/°K). At T = 300° К (room
temperature), kT’ = 26 meV = 4.14 zJ = 209 cm™!, as illustrated in Fig. 13.1-2. The
origin of the Boltzmann distribution is discussed in Sec. 14.2.
T, >T
n Е ee Figure 13.2-6 Boltzmann prob-
n ability distribution P(E,) (plotted
along the abscissa) versus energy
: : Е, (plotted along the ordinate) for
. . two values of the temperature Т.
The lower the temperature, the less
2 Е likely that higher energy levels are
2 Г occupied. The allowed energy lev-
1 Е els of a collection of photons in а
у mode of frequency и are illustrated
0 E, at left.
PE)

We now assume that the collection of photons in a mode of frequency и inside
the resonator behaves as a gas in thermal equilibrium at temperature T’ that obeys the
Boltzmann distribution, and that the mode has allowed energy levels given by E, =
(n + $)hv, as provided in (13.1-5). It then follows that the probability of finding п
photons in the mode is given by

nhv hv \]"
——| = —— =0,1,2,.... 13.2-19
ee ee) стола... азы
Normalizing (13.2-19) so that it sums to unity, i.e., imposing the condition )>°° 4 p(n) =
1, provides the normalization constant [1 — exp(—hv/kT)]. The zero-point energy
Eo= Три disappears into the normalization and does not affect the results.

The probability distribution for the number of photons n in a resonator mode of
frequency и given in (13.2-19) is most simply written in terms of the mean photon
number 7 as

1 п \
p(n) = = (*,) , (13.2-20)
At+l\at+l Bose-Einstein Distribution

13.2 PHOTONSTREAMS 537
where
1

=, 13.2-21

” exp(hv/kT) — 1 ( )
which has been determined from (13.2-13). It is reassuring that (13.2-21) accords with
the mean photon number calculated in (14.4-7) for a collection of photons interacting
with atoms in thermal equilibrium, as will be seen in Sec. 14.4A. In the parlance of
probability theory, the distribution displayed in (13.2-20) is known as the geometric
distribution since p(n) is a geometrically decreasing function of n. In the physics
literature, it is generally referred to as the Bose-Einstein distribution since it was
first set forth by Bose based on a statistical argument for counting the states of in-
distinguishable particles such as photons. Einstein recognized that (13.2-20) was also
applicable for describing bosons whose numbers are conserved, and he predicted the
possibility of a condensation to the lowest energy state in a bosonic atomic gas cooled
below a critical temperature (Sec. 14.3F).

The Bose-Einstein distribution is displayed on a semilogarithmic plot in Fig. 13.2-7
for several values of the mean photon number п [or, equivalently, several values of the
temperature T via (13.2-21)]. Its exponential character is apparent from the straight-
line behavior on this semilogarithmic plot. Comparing Fig. 13.2-7 with Fig. 13.2-5 for
the Poisson distribution demonstrates that the photon-number distributions for thermal
light decrease monotonically from n = 0 and are far broader than those for coherent
light.

1
p(n) К
10-1 Ryo
10-3
0 5 10 15 n 20
Figure 13.2-7 Semilogarithmic plot of the Bose-Einstein photon-number distribution, p(n) vs. п,
for several values of the mean photon number п. The curves broaden substantially as 7 increases.

The photon-number variance of the Bose-Einstein distribution, which is readily
calculated via (13.2-14), turns out to be

of =п+ п?, (13.2-22)

Variance

Bose-Einstein Distribution

where п is the photon-number mean. Comparing the Bose-Einstein and Poisson vari-

ances given in (13.2-22) and (13.2-15), respectively, reveals that, for п > 1, the

former grows quadratically with п while the latter grows linearly. The photon-number

fluctuations of the Bose—Einstein distribution are clearly far greater than those of the

Poisson distribution, as is apparent in the comparison of Figs. 13.2-7 and 13.2-5. This

large variability is consistent with the random nature of thermal light, as described in

Sec. 12.1. The noisiness of the Bose-Einstein distribution is crisply highlighted in its
signal-to-noise ratio, which, in accordance with (13.2-16), is given by

SNR = Ш (13.2-23)

ПИ.

538 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
The Bose-Einstein SNR always remains smaller than unity no matter how large п,
confirming that thermal light is generally too noisy to be used for the transmission of
information.
ee
EXERCISE 13.2-1
Average Energy of a Resonator Mode in Thermal Equilibrium. Show that the average
energy of a resonator mode of frequency v, under conditions of thermal equilibrium at temperature
T, is given by
— hv /kT
Е = kT ——_———__.. 13.2-24
exp(hv/kT) —1 ( )
Sketch the dependence of E on Ay for several values of kT’. Use a Taylor-series expansion of the
denominator to obtain an expression for E in the limit hv/kT’ < 1. Explain the result on a physical
basis.
ee
*Doubly Stochastic Photon-Number Statistics
As indicated earlier, coherent light has constant intensity I(r, #), constant optical power
P, and constant photon flux Ф = P/hv. The arriving photons behave as independent
events with a Poisson photon-number distribution p(n) = n”e~"/n!, where the mean
photon number 7 = ФТ = PT/hi is constant. However, if the light is partially co-
herent and its intensity varies in time, then so too does the optical power [as portrayed
in Fig. 13.2-3(6)], the photon flux, and the mean photon number п. In accordance with
(13.2-10) and (13.2-11), in that case the mean photon number, which we denote as w
rather than n for notational convenience, can be expressed as
1 fl 1 ["
м = и = — | P(t)dt= — I(x, t) dA dt. 13.2-25

и | РФ = т || тео (132-25)
The integrated intensity w, which has units of mean photon number and is thus dimen-
sionless, varies in time for partially coherent light.

Variations in the mean photon number arising from intensity fluctuations cause the
photon-number distribution to depart from Poisson behavior, as we now show. If the
fluctuations of w are described by a probability density function p(w), the new photon-
number probability distribution is obtained by averaging the Poisson distribution con-
ditioned on w being constant, p(n|w) = ме * /п!, over the permitted values of му
dictated by p(w). The alert reader will notice that we have co-opted the symbol n for
the new photon number. The resultant photon-number distribution then takes the form

p(n) = ] — p(w) dw, (13.2-26)

0 п: Mandel’s Formula

which is known as Mandel’s formula. Equation (13.2-26) is a doubly stochastic

photon-number distribution by virtue of its two contributing sources of randomness:

1) the random arrivals of the photons themselves, which locally behave in Poisson

fashion; and 2) the integrated-intensity fluctuations arising from the partially coherent

nature of the illumination. An underlying sequence of random photon arrivals that leads

to doubly stochastic photon-number statistics is known as a doubly stochastic Poisson
process (DSPP).

13.2 PHOTONSTREAMS 539
The photon-number mean and variance for the doubly stochastic photon-number
distribution are obtained by using (13.2-13) and (13.2-14) in conjunction with (13.2-
26); the results are п (13.2-27)
and
o7 =T+o2, (13.2-28)
respectively. Here 02, signifies the variance of м». The photon-number variance thus
comprises two contributions: 1) the basic Poisson contribution п ; and 2) a (positive)
contribution arising from the intensity fluctuations. It is worth noting that the theory of
photon statistics presented here is applicable only for classical light; a more general
theory encompassing nonclassical light requires a quantum approach (Sec. 13.3).
An instructive example makes use of an integrated intensity that obeys the exponen-
tial probability density function
1 w
pw) = exp( a) w20 (13.2-29)
0, w < 0.
Equation (13.2-29) is appropriate for quasi-monochromatic light whose independent
and identically distributed real and imaginary complex-field-amplitude components are
Gaussian. It is applicable for a source of light whose spectral width is sufficiently small
such that its coherence time 7, is much greater than the counting time 7, and whose
coherence area A, is much greater than the detector integration area A (see Chapter 12).
The photon-number distribution p(n) that corresponds to (13.2-29) is determined by
substituting this result into (13.2-26) and evaluating the integral. The outcome turns out
to be the Bose-Einstein distribution given in (13.2-20). Hence, the photon statistics of
the Gaussian-distributed optical field described above are identical to those of single-
mode thermal light. Multimode thermal light emerges when the counting time T and
photodetector integration area A are not small (Probs. 13.2-6-13.2-8).
D. Random Partitioning of Photon Streams
A photon stream is said to be partitioned when it is subjected to the removal of some of
its photons. The process is called random partitioning when the removed photons are
diverted and random selection when they are annihilated. There are numerous ways in
which this can occur. Perhaps the simplest example of random partitioning is provided
by an ideal lossless beamsplitter. Photons are randomly selected to exit either of the
two output ports (Fig. 13.2-8). An example of random selection is provided by the
action of a photodetector. Photons incident on the photosensitive material are selected
either to be absorbed and create photoelectrons or to pass through it and be lost.
Lossless
beamsplitter . > Figure 13.2-8 Random parti-
г? ет tioning of a stream of photons by
; if bi a beamsplitter.
We restrict the treatment presented here to situations in which the probability of each
photon being partitioned behaves in accordance with an independent Bernoulli trial
(coin toss). In terms of the beamsplitter, this is satisfied if a photon stream impinges on
only one of its input ports (Fig. 13.2-8). This eliminates the possibility of interference,
which in general invalidates the independent-trial assumption (see, e.g., Example 13.3-
3). The results derived below apply to both random partitioning and random selection.

540 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS

Consider a lossless beamsplitter of transmittance J and reflectance R = 1 — J.
The result of a single photon impinging on this device was examined in Sec. 13.1C,
where it was shown that the probability of a photon being transmitted is equal to the
transmittance of the beamsplitter J and the probability of the photon being reflected
is equal to 1 — J (Fig. 13.1-6). We now consider a photon stream of mean flux Ф is
incident on the beamsplitter, so that a mean number of photons п = ФТ impinges оп
it in the time interval 7. The mean number of transmitted and reflected photons is then
Tn and (1 — J)n, respectively.

We proceed to determine how the photon-number statistics of the incident photon
stream are modified upon partitioning. If the incident stream consists of precisely n
photons, the probability p(m) that m photons are transmitted is the same as that of
flipping a biased coin n times and obtaining m heads, when the probability of obtaining
a head is J. From elementary probability theory we know that p(m) is characterized
by the binomial distribution

p(m) = (”) gma)", m=0,1,...,9, (13.2-30)
where (") = п!/т! (п — т)!. By symmetry, the results for the reflected photons are
identical, with 1 — J replacing J. The statistics of the binomial distribution yield the
mean number of transmitted photons

т = ‘Тп, (13.2-31)
and its variance
o7=T(1—-T)n=(1—T)M. (13.2-32)
The signal-to-noise ratio specified in (13.2-16) is thus SNR = m?/o2, = т/(1 —
J), which increases linearly with the mean number of transmitted photons 77. When
the incident wave is strong, the photons will therefore be partitioned between the
transmitted and reflected beams in good agreement with J and (1 — J), respectively,
confirming that the classical-optics result is recovered.

The expressions provided above for a fixed number of incident photons permit the
photon-number statistics of the partitioned stream to be determined. The calculation
proceeds by recognizing that in the general case the number of photons n at the
input to the beamsplitter is random rather than fixed. Let the probability be po(n)
that in a specified time interval there are n photons present at the beamsplitter in-
put. The photon-number probability distribution for the transmitted stream will then
be a weighted sum of binomial distributions, with the weighting established by the
probability of n photons being present. The photon-number distribution p(m) at the
output of the beamsplitter, for an input photon-number distribution ро(п), is therefore
p(m) = >>, p(m|n) po(n), where the observation of m photons conditioned on n being
fixed is the binomial distribution p(m|n) = (") 7” (1-Т)"-”. Finally, then, we obtain
a formula that yields p(m) in terms of po(n) and J:

p(m) = У` (" ) т” (1 —T)"—™ yo(n). (13.2-33)

п=т ПТ Photon-Number Distribution

Under Random Partitioning

This formula is also applicable for the detection of photons, as considered in Sec. 19.6A.

13.3 QUANTUM STATES OF LIGHT 541

When the input photon-number distribution ро(п) is Poisson (for coherent light) or
Bose-Einstein (for single-mode thermal light), the results turn out to be quite simple:
the form of the partitioned photon-number distribution p(m) exactly matches that of
the incident photon-number distribution p(n). Thus, single-mode laser light transmit-
ted through a beamsplitter remains Poisson and thermal light remains Bose-Einstein,
although of course the photon-number mean is reduced by the factor J. In contrast,
photon-number-squeezed light (Sec. 13.3C) does not retain its form under random
partitioning, a property that is responsible for its lack of robustness. In particular,
number-state light, which comprises a deterministic photon number, obeys the bino-
mial photon-number distribution after partitioning.

The signal-to-noise ratio for m is readily determined for partitioned photon streams.
For coherent light and single-mode thermal light, the results are, respectively,

Тп coherent light (13.2-34)
Tal thermal light. (13.2-35)
Since J < 1 it is clear that random partitioning decreases the signal-to-noise ratio.
Another way of stating this is to say that random partitioning introduces noise.
*13.3 QUANTUM STATES OF LIGHT
The number of photons in an electromagnetic mode is generally a random quantity.
In this section it will be shown that in the context of quantum optics the electric field
itself is also generally random. Consider a monochromatic plane-wave electromagnetic
mode in a volume У, described by the electric field E(r,t) = Re{E(r, t)}, where
E(r,t) = Aexp(—jk-r) exp(j27vt) e. (13.3-1)
According to classical electromagnetic optics, as provided in (13.1-3), the energy of
the mode is fixed at $¢|A|?V. We define a complex variable a, such that $¢|A|?V =
hv|a|, thereby allowing |а |? to be interpreted as the energy of the mode in units of
photon number. The electric field may then be written as
2hv . . ~
E(r,t) = wv 4 exp(—jk-r) exp(j27vt) e, (13.3-2)
€
where the complex variable a determines the complex amplitude of the field.

In classical electromagnetic optics, a exp(j27vt) is a rotating phasor whose projec-
tion on the real axis determines the sinusoidal electric field, as portrayed in Fig. 13.3-1.
The real and imaginary parts of a = x + jp, which are x = Re{a} and p = Im{a},
respectively, are termed the quadrature components of the phasor a because they are
a quarter cycle (90°) out of phase with each other. They determine the amplitude
and phase of the sine wave that represents the temporal variation of the electric field.
The rotating phasor a exp(j27vt) also describes the motion of a harmonic oscillator;
the real component x is proportional to position and the imaginary component p to
momentum. From a mathematical point of view, then, a classical monochromatic mode
of the electromagnetic field and a classical harmonic oscillator behave identically. A
parallel argument can be constructed to show that a guantum monochromatic electro-
magnetic mode and a one-dimensional quantum-mechanical harmonic oscillator also
have identical behavior. To facilitate the comparison, we review the quantum theory of
a simple harmonic oscillator before proceeding.

542 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
w E(t)

i \ a \
Figure 13.3-1 The real and imaginary parts of the variable аехр(72тиф), which govern the
complex amplitude of a classical electromagnetic mode of frequency v. The time dynamics are
identical to those of a classical harmonic oscillator with angular frequency w = 27v.
Quantum Theory of the Harmonic Oscillator
A particle of mass т, position 2, momentum р, and potential energy V(x) = $427,
where к is the elastic constant, represents a one-dimensional harmonic oscillator of
total energy 4p?/m + 44x and oscillation frequency w = \/к/т. Without loss of
generality, we take m = 1 so that the energy is 2 (р? + wz”).

In accordance with the laws of quantum mechanics, the behavior of this quantum
system in a stationary state is described by a complex wavefunction w() that satisfies
the time-independent Schrédinger equation [see (14.1-3)],

he &u (a)

“Sm 2 + У(@)4 (2) = Ev(a), (13.3-3)
where Е is the energy of the particle. The solutions of the Schrédinger equation for
the harmonic oscillator, for which V(x) = 542242, give rise to discrete energy values
given by

Ев = (n+ 4) hy, n=0,1,2,.... (13.3-4)
Adjacent energy levels are seen to be separated by a quantum of energy hv = hw. The
corresponding wavefunctions w,,(a) are normalized Hermite—Gaussian functions,

1 w \1/4 [м wax
where Н» (1) is the Hermite polynomial of order n [see (3.3-6)—(3.3-8) and (3.3-11)].

An arbitrary wavefunction w(x) may be expanded in terms of the set of orthonormal
eigenfunctions {7,,(x)} in terms of the superposition (5) = >`, CnWn(x). Given the
wavefunction (2), which governs the state of the system, the behavior of the particle
is determined as follows:

= The probability p(n) that the harmonic oscillator carries n quanta of energy is

given by the coefficient |c,|?.

= The probability density of finding the particle at the position 2 is given by |7)(x)|?.

= The probability density that the momentum of the particle is р is given by |¢(p)|?,

where Ф(р) is proportional to the inverse Fourier transform of ¢)(x) evaluated at
the (spatial) frequency p/h,
(0) = [| v(ojexp(j2mBx) 4 (133-6
р) = = х)ехр| 7121-х ) ах. .3-
Vi Joe an
As shown in Sec. A.2 of Appendix A, the Fourier-transform relation between

13.3 QUANTUM STATES ОЕ LIGHT 543
w(a) and ¢(p) indicates that there is an uncertainty relation between the power-
RMS widths of x and p/h given by
CxO 1 h
р” > ik or Ox0p = 3° (13.3-7)
This is the well-known Heisenberg position—momentum uncertainty relation pro-
vided in (A.2-7) of Appendix A.
Analogy Between an Optical Mode and a Harmonic Oscillator
The energy of an electromagnetic mode is hv|a |? = hv(x? + р?). The analogy with a
harmonic oscillator of energy $(w?x? + р?) is established by effecting the connections
x= (м/т) we and p= (ить) р. (13.3-8)
The modal energy then becomes hv(x? + р?) = 4$(w?a? + р?), which leads to
the harmonic-oscillator energy levels provided in (13.3-4). Because the analogy is
complete, we conclude that the energy of a quantum, monochromatic electromagnetic
mode, like that of a one-dimensional, quantum-mechanical harmonic oscillator, is
quantized to the values FE, = (п + 5) hv, as initially suggested in (13.1-5). With
proper scaling normalization factors, the behavior of the position and momentum
of the harmonic oscillator, x and р, also describe the quadrature components of the
electromagnetic field, x and p, respectively.
Properties of a Quantum Electromagnetic Mode
An quantum electromagnetic mode of frequency v is described by a complex
wavefunction w(x) that governs the uncertainties of the quadrature components
x and p of the electromagnetic field, as well as the statistics of the number of
photons in the mode.
= The probability p(n) that the mode contains п photons is given by |c,|?, where
the c, are coefficients of the expansion of (x) in terms of the eigenfunctions
Yn(x), Le. VOX) = Lin Cn фи(х).
и The probability density functions of the quadrature components x and р are
given by |~(x)|? and |¢(p)|, respectively, where 7(x) and ¢(p) are related by
1 CO
= — x) ехр(72рх) dx. 13.3-9
Ф(р) ss | ) exp(j2px) ( )
This equation is derived from (13.3-6) by use of the transformation (13.3-8) and
by noting that |4 (х)|? and |¢(p)|? integrate to unity.
= The uncertainty relation between the power-RMS widths of the quadrature
components is given by
Ox0p > 1, (13.3-10)
Quadrature Uncertainty
so that these components cannot be simultaneously determined with arbitrary
precision.

544 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
A. Coherent States
The quadrature uncertainty product 0,0, attains its minimum value of 1/4 when the
function р (х) is Gaussian (Sec. A.2 of Appendix A). In that case
w(x) x exp[—(x — ах)? |, (13.3-11)
so that its Fourier transform is also Gaussian,
2
o(p) x exp|—(p — ap)’} . (13.3-12)
Here, a, and сир are arbitrary values that represent the means of x and р, respectively.
The quadrature uncertainties, determined from |7(x)|? and |6(p)|?, are then given by
Ox = др = 1/2. (13.3-13)
Under these conditions the electromagnetic field is said to be in a coherent state.
The one-standard-deviation range of uncertainty in the quadrature components x and
р, as well as in the complex amplitude a and in the electric field €(t), are illustrated
in Fig. 13.3-2 for coherent-state light. The uncertainties are most pronounced when
ay and ср are small. The squared-magnitude coefficients |c,|? for the expansion of
w(x) in the Hermite—Gaussian basis are 7” exp(—7)/n!, where й = a? + о, so the
photon-number distribution p(n) is Poisson, as suggested in the discussion surrounding
(13.2-12). Unlike its status in electromagnetic optics, in the context of quantum optics
coherent-state light is not deterministic. The coherent state is generated by an ideal,
amplitude-stabilized, single-mode laser operated well above its threshold of oscillation.
х| 20, = | Бы | .
| м р) VU \ |
Figure 13.3-2 Quadrature and electric-field uncertainties for the coherent state. Representative
values of E(t) «x aexp(j2mvt) are traced for several arbitrary points within the uncertainty circle;
the coefficient of proportionality is chosen to be unity for convenience.
Figure 13.3-3 displays the quadrature uncertainties and time behavior of the electric
field for the coherent state when a, = a, = 0, which is called the vacuum state.
B. Quadrature-Squeezed States
Though the uncertainty product 0,0, cannot be reduced below its minimum value of
1/4, the uncertainty of one of the quadrature components can be reduced (“‘squeezed”’)
below 1/2 but this entails increased uncertainty in the other component. This form of
light, which is distinctly nonclassical, is said to be quadrature-squeezed. For exam-
ple, a state for which (x) is a Gaussian function with a squeezed width o, = 1/2s,
where $ > 1, corresponds to a Gaussian function ¢(p) with a stretched width о» =
s/2. The product охор maintains its minimum value of !/4, but the uncertainty circle
of the phasor a for the coherent state (Fig. 13.3-2) is squeezed into an ellipse, as
displayed in Fig. 13.3-4.
The particular quadrature-squeezed state illustrated in Fig. 13.3-4 is known as an
amplitude-squeezed state since the phasor amplitude uncertainty is reduced at the

13.3 QUANTUM STATES OF LIGHT 545
x E(t)
сос
a SEBO
=
Figure 13.3-3 Quadrature and electric-field uncertainties for the vacuum state. This state is a
limiting case for both the coherent state (a, = а, = 0) and the number state (п = 0). The mode
carries zero photons and has only the residual zero-point energy hv. The circle of uncertainty is
squeezed into an ellipse for the squeezed vacuum state; however, squeezing the vacuum endows it
with a finite mean photon number.
expense of its phase uncertainty. The asymmetry in the uncertainties of the two quadra-
tures is manifested in the time course of the electric field by periodic occurrences of
decreased uncertainty, followed each quarter cycle later by occurrences of increased
uncertainty. If the field is measured only at those times when its uncertainty is minimal,
its noise will be reduced below that of the coherent state. The selection of those times
may be achieved by heterodyning the squeezed field with a coherent optical field of
appropriate phase (heterodyne receivers are discussed in Sec. 25.4).
x EDA | 13

Figure 13.3-4 Quadrature and electric-field uncertainties for a quadrature-squeezed state (specif-
ically, an amplitude-squeezed state). The uncertainty circle associated with the coherent state
(Fig. 13.3-2) is squeezed into an ellipse of the same area. If the uncertainty ellipse were to be rotated
by 90°, so that its long axis lay along the phasor rather than perpendicular to it, the result would
be a phase-squeezed state since the phase uncertainty would then be reduced at the expense of the
amplitude uncertainty. The squeezed vacuum state takes the form of an ellipse at the origin.
Generation and applications of quadrature-squeezed light. Though not robust in
the face of optical losses, quadrature-squeezed light has garnered an important niche
in precision measurements because of the reduced noisiness of one of its quadratures.
The textbook example is the merit of using quadrature-squeezed light in the LIGO
gravitational-wave interferometer. In the interferometer configuration considered in
Example 2.5-1, for example, all beamsplitter ports are covered by impinging light
beams except for the output port, which is exposed to the normal vacuum. Improved
interferometer sensitivity is obtained by injecting squeezed vacuum (of appropriate
phase) into the output port.” Quadrature-squeezed light may be generated in a number
of ways, including via optical parametric downconversion in a cavity (Sec. 22.2C).

1 See, e.g., М. С. Teich and В. Е. A. Saleh, Squeezed and Antibunched Light, Physics Today, vol. 43, по. 6,
pp. 26-34, 1990.

546 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS

C. Photon-Number-Squeezed States

Quadrature-squeezed light exhibits reduced uncertainty in one of its quadrature field
components relative to that of the coherent state. Another form of nonclassical light
is photon-number-squeezed light, also referred to as intensity-squeezed or sub-
Poisson light. This form of light has a photon-number variance that is squeezed below
the coherent-state (Poisson) value, 1.е., 0? < п. Photon-number fluctuations obeying
this relation are nonclassical since (13.2-28) cannot be satisfied.

An electromagnetic mode described by the harmonic oscillator eigenstate w(x) =
Wno(x) provides an example of photon-number-squeezed light. This state is referred
to as the number state because p(n) = |c,|? = 1 for a fixed number of photons
п = по; the number state is also called the Fock state. Since the number of photons
carried by the mode is deterministic, we have п = no and 0? = 0. The case по = 1
corresponds to a single photon in the mode. The uncertainties associated with number-
state light are illustrated in Fig. 13.3-5. Though the quadrature components as well
as the phasor magnitude and phase are all uncertain, the photon number is fixed. For
по = 0, the number state reduces to the vacuum state displayed in Fig. 13.3-3. Photon-
number-squeezing can also be generated using other states, e.g., the binomial state
(Prob. 13.3-1).

x E(t)
WV
ух
АЛЛА
CTT ИИ

Уд Хх
Figure 13.3-5 Representative uncertainties for the number state. The mode contains a fixed
number of photons, n = no. This state is photon-number-squeezed but not quadrature-squeezed.
Generation and applications of photon-number-squeezed light. Just as with
quadrature-squeezed light, losses adversely affect photon-number-squeezed light
(Sec. 13.2D). Nevertheless, this form of nonclassical light enjoys a range of ap-
plications in quantum information processing, communications, computing, and
cryptography. Photon-number-squeezed light may be generated via mechanisms that
include: 1) the use of feedback to impart anticorrelations to an otherwise Poisson
sequence of photons; 2) sub-Poisson excitation (e.g., via a stream of electrons subject
to space charge) of an atom or other entity that emits a single photon in response to
the excitation; 3) conversion from two-photon light whereby the arrival of one photon
of a pair serves to herald the presence of its simultaneously arriving companion, as
described in Sec. 13.3D; and 4) emission from a quantum dot, defect, or similar entity
embedded in a photonic structure, as considered in Sec. 17.2E.
D. Two-Photon Light
Two-photon light, yet another form of nonclassical light, is described by a joint wave-
function that represents its joint probability amplitude. For example, its spatial prop-
erties are described by the wavefunction U(x 1,22), where |U(a 1, x2)|? is the joint
probability density of finding the photons at positions x, and 12 in the transverse
plane. The corresponding directional (or spatial-frequency) properties are described
by the two-dimensional Fourier transform of О (тт, 22), which is denoted У (ил, Vz2).
The joint probability density of finding photons with wavevectors k; and kz (momenta

13.3 QUANTUM STATES OF LIGHT 547
hk, and hk) is given Бу |У (ил, #2) 2, where kyy = ли and kyg = ли, are
the transverse components of the wavevectors. The temporal and spectral properties
are similarly described by the joint wavefunctions U(t1, №) and its two-dimensional
Fourier transform У (1, 12).

While the polarization state of classical or single-photon light is described by the
Jones vector J = la: | that of two-photon light is described by a 2 x 2 joint matrix
J= [= д» | where the first and second subscripts denote the polarizations of the
first and second photons, respectively. For example, | Aya|? represents the probability
of detecting the first and second photons in the y (vertical or V) and x (horizontal or
H) polarizations, respectively.

Entangled Photons
If the two photons are independent, their joint wavefunction factors into a product of
the individual wavefunctions. In that case

О (a1, 12) = 01(21)02(22), (13.3-14)
so that the probability of detecting the two photons also factors, indicating that the
positions of the two photons are statistically independent and uncorrelated.

If the joint wavefunction is not factorable into a product, however, the photons are
said to be entangled. An extreme case is the wavefunction

x
which describes two photons that are always detected at the same position (21 = 22),
although that position is random with probability density |U,(x,)|?. In that case, the
photons are said to be maximally entangled. The Fourier transform of (13.3-15) is
Ил
where V,(v,,) is the one-dimensional Fourier transform of U,(x). The transverse com-
ponents of the wavevector are then anticorrelated (№, = —k,2), indicating that the
photon directions are also anticorrelated.

An example of two photons that are maximally entangled in polarization 15 provided
by the polarization state
у L fot

J= Va | i . (13.3-17)
H

H У
There are then two polarization possibilities and they have equal probabilities: photon
1 is y polarized and photon 2 is x polarized, or vice-versa. Each photon can be either
vertically or horizontally polarized, but if one is vertically polarized, the other must be
horizontally polarized. In the quantum-optics literature, the photon pair is said to be in

548 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS

a VH+HV superposition state, where У and H represent the vertical (y) and horizontal
(x) polarizations, respectively. An entangled photon pair is also called a biphoton and
two-photon light is sometimes called twin-beam light.

Generation and applications of two-photon light. Entangled two-photon light may
be generated by means of spontaneous parametric downconversion (SPDC), a non-
linear optical process whereby some fraction of a beam of photons incident on a
nonlinear optical crystal are split into pairs of photons, while conserving energy and
momentum (Sec. 22.2C). Given that the energy of a photon is Е = hw, conservation
of energy dictates that the frequency of the incident photon (called the pump) must
equal the sum of the energies of the two downconverted photons (called the signal
and idler), 1е., Wy = ил + we or (wy — 5 Wp) = —(% — Wp). If the pump is
monochromatic, w, is fixed and ил and we are anticorrelated variables. By virtue of
the Fourier-transform relation between the spectral and temporal wavefunctions, this
implies that the emission times are fully correlated, i.e., #1 = ta.

Similarly, given that the momentum of a photon is р = ЙК, conservation of momen-
tum dictates that the pump wavevector must equal the sum of the wavevectors of the
two downconverted photons, i.e., К» = К! + ko. If the pump is a plane-wave traveling
along the axial (z) direction, the transverse components k,, and k2, of the wavevectors
of the generated photons must then sum to zero. Thus, 0 = kyz + Кох or Ко, = —kiz,
revealing that these components are anticorrelated; the positions from which the two
photons are emitted are thus correlated, i.e., х1 = x2. This two-photon wavefunction
thus assumes the form specified in (13.3-15), where U,(x) is determined by the dimen-
sions and optical properties of the nonlinear crystal in which the entangled photons
are generated. Downconverted photons can also exhibit polarization entanglement if
the nonlinear process requires that they have orthogonal polarizations. SPDC is useful
for generating entangled two-photon light in crystal-based bulk optics (Example 22.2-
3) as well as in monolithic semiconductor chips. Hollow-core photonic-crystal fibers
(Sec. 10.4) filled with noble gases such as argon can also be configured to generate
two-photon light via a modulation instability.

Two-photon light can be used to generate single-photon light by using the arrival
of one member of the photon pair to herald the presence of the other. Entangled pho-
tons find use in applications such as secure quantum communications, cryptography,
sensing, and imaging. Entanglement can be distributed over long distances — satellite-
based entanglement distribution has been achieved for locations on earth separated by
more than 1200 km.

Two-Photon Optics
The transmission of two-photon light through a linear optical system obeys equations
based on classical optics, as we proceed to describe.
Polarization optics. When a classical plane wave whose polarization described by
the Jones vector J; is transmitted through a polarization element with Jones matrix T,
the Jones vector of the outgoing wave is J, = TJ; (Sec. 6.1B). This relation, which
is also applicable for single-photon light, is readily generalized to two-photon light by
applying the matrix T twice, once for each photon, which gives rise to

J, =TJ;T', (13.3-18)
where the superscript T signifies the matrix transpose.

13.3 QUANTUM STATES OF LIGHT 549
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 13.3-1. Polarization Rotator. The Jones matrix of a 45° polarization rotator is
T= ws Ё 1 [see (6.1-20)]. Upon transmission through such a device, polarization-entangled
photons described by the VH+HV Jones vector J; = ws [2%] [see (13.3-17)] are characterized by
J,= 7 = р "| . This Jones vector represents entangled photons in the VV—HH state, for which the
outgoing photons must be of the same polarization; the probability that they are of orthogonal polar-
ization is zero. It can be demonstrated that maximally entangled light remains maximally entangled
when subjected to polarization rotation for an arbitrary angle.
ПИ
Spatial optics. When a classical wave with wavefunction U;(x,y) is transmitted
through an optical system with impulse response function h(x, y; x’, y’), the outgoing
wave U,(x,y) is described by the integral (13.1-9), which also applies for single-
photon light. This result may be generalized to two-photon light by applying the im-
pulse response function twice, once for each photon. Ignoring the y dependence for
simplicity, we then have

CoO
U,(#1, 22) = Ш й(т1;11) h(a; x25) Uj (a, 25) dx’, drs, (13.3-19)
—©

where the subscripts 1 and 2 denote photons | and 2, respectively. Note that (13.3-19)
is analogous to (12.3-5) in Sec. 12.3A, which describes the propagation of partially
coherent light with mutual intensity G(1, 72) through a linear optical system. But
note also that the conjugation in (12.3-5) is absent in (13.3-19).
«И
EXAMPLE 13.3-2. Fourier-Transform System. For a 2-f optical system that implements а
Fourier-transform operation (Sec. 4.2B), 1.е., h(a; a") x exp(—jxa’/Af), where Л is the wavelength
and f is the focal length of the lens, we have U,(21, 22) « V;(ai/Af,22/Af), where У; (ил, x2)
is the two-dimensional Fourier transform of U;(xz1, 22). The 2-f system manifests the directional,
or momentum, characteristics of two-photon light. Correlated photons are converted by the Fourier-
transforming lens into anticorrelated photons.
ПИ
Two-beam optics. Two-photon light in the form of two beams, labeled а and Ъ, is
described by a2 x 2 joint matrix J; = 5 | ae fe] ‚ where, for example, | Ayal? is the
probability that the first and second photons are found in beams b and a, respectively.
If the two beams are mixed at a lossless device characterized by a scattering matrix
S (see Sec. 7.1A), the outgoing pair of beams of two-photon light is described by the
matrix J, = SJ ЭТ, а relation that assumes the same form as (13.3-18).
ПИ
EXAMPLE 13.3-3. Нопд-—Ои-МапаЕе! (HOM) Interferometer. А lossless symmetric beam-
splitter is characterized by the scattering matrix S = Ws Ё i]. e ee
as provided in (7.1-18). For incoming light described by J; =
Wa [2 4]. indicating that there is a single photon in each beam, we
obtain J, = SJ;S' = J; [03]. This reveals that the outgoing = Ф oe
photons always emerge together as a pair, out of one or the other i
port, and there is zero probability that each photon emerges from a different port.’ Hence, the two

1 See С. К. Hong, Z. У. Ou, and L. Mandel, Measurement of Subpicosecond Time Intervals Between Two
Photons by Interference, Physical Review Letters, vol. 59, pp. 2044—2046, 1987.

550 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS

indistinguishable photons that were initially separate, each entering a different input port of the
beamsplitter, exit the beamsplitter “stuck together” from one of the (randomly chosen) output ports.
This outcome may be understood by observing that there are two paths the input photons could
follow at the beamsplitter for them to emerge from different output ports — both could undergo
reflection or both could undergo transmission. However, the probability amplitudes for these two
possibilities are equal since the photons are indistinguishable, and they cancel because of the phase
shift associated with reflection at the beamsplitter. Hence, the only remaining possibilities are that
the photons emerge together from the same output port. The beamsplitter thus serves to convert two
indistinguishable photons at its input ports into two entangled photons at its output ports, since the
two photons always emerge from the same output port, although which port is random. This form
of two-photon interference, known as Hong—Ou—Mandel interference, is widely used in quantum
optics, quantum information, and quantum imaging.
«ПИ
Applications of two-photon optics. Optical systems employing two-photon light
find application in a number of areas. An example in the domain of imaging is provided
by quantum optical coherence tomography" (QOCT), a two-photon interferometric
technique that allows a multilayered medium to be axially sectioned. This imaging
modality makes use of two indistinguishable photons; a Hong—Ou—Mandel interfer-
ometer in which one of the photons is reflected from a movable mirror while the
other is reflected from the sample before being presented to the two input ports of the
beamsplitter; and a pair of photodetectors connected to register the photon-coincidence
rate at the output ports of the beamsplitter. The depths of the reflective layers in the
sample are revealed by determining the path delays of the movable mirror that lead
to dips in the coincidence rate, thereby indicating the presence of HOM interference.
QOCT is the two-photon analog of optical coherence tomography (OCT), discussed
in Sec. 12.2B, which makes use of partially coherent light of short coherence length;
a Michelson interferometer in which one the mirrors is replaced by the sample; and a
photodetector responsive to intensity (Fig. 12.2-3). For OCT, the depths of the reflec-
tive layers in the sample are revealed by determining the path delays of the movable
mirror that lead to interference fringes in the intensity. Though QOCT is more complex
to implement than OCT, it has the merit that it is immune to even-order group velocity
dispersion (GVD) in the sample, which serves to increase the attainable resolution and
sectioning depth; the technique simultaneously permits the GVD coefficients of the
media that comprise the sample to be determined.

The implementation of two-photon optical systems has been substantially advanced
by the development of integrated quantum photonics, a platform in which on-chip
quantum circuits generate and manipulate quantum states of light such as single pho-
tons, entangled photons, and complex states in which entanglement is shared among
multiple modes.

READING LIST
Quantum Optics
Z.-Y. J. Ou, Quantum Optics for Experimentalists, World Scientific, 2017.
М. Orszag, Quantum Optics: Including Noise Reduction, Trapped Ions, Quantum Trajectories, and

Decoherence, Springer-Verlag, 3rd ed. 2016.

C. W. Gardiner and P. Zoller, The Quantum World of Ultra-Cold Atoms and Light. Book I: Founda-

tions of Quantum Optics, Imperial College Press, 2014.

1 See М. В. Nasr, В. Е. A. Saleh, A. У. Sergienko, and М. С. Teich, Dispersion-Cancelled and Dispersion-
Sensitive Quantum Optical Coherence Tomography, Optics Express, vol. 12, рр. 1353—1362, 2004.

READING LIST 551

G. S. Agarwal, Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2012.

G. Grynberg, A. Aspect, and C. Fabre, Introduction to Quantum Optics: From the Semi-Classical
Approach to Quantized Light, Cambridge University Press, 2010.

U. Leonhardt, Essential Quantum Optics: From Quantum Measurements to Black Holes, Cambridge
University Press, 2010.

р. Е Walls and С. J. Milburn, Quantum Optics, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2008.

J. С. Garrison and К. У. Chiao, Quantum Optics, Oxford University Press, 2008.

Р. Meystre and М. Sargent Ш, Elements of Quantum Optics, Springer-Verlag, 4th ed. 2007.

M. Fox, Quantum Optics: An Introduction, Oxford University Press, 2006.

W. Vogel and D.-G. Welsch, Quantum Optics, Wiley-VCH, 3rd ed. 2006.

C. C. Gerry and P. L. Knight, Introductory Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2005.

H.-A. Bachor and T. C. Ralph, A Guide to Experiments in Quantum Optics, Wiley-VCH, 2nd ed.
2004.

W. P. Schleich, Quantum Optics in Phase Space, Wiley-VCH, 2001.

R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light, Oxford University Press, 3rd ed. 2000.

У. Perinova, A. Luks, and J. Perina, Phase in Optics, World Scientific, 1998.

M. O. Scully and M. S. Zubairy, Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, paperback ed. 1997.

G. S. Agarwal, ed., Selected Papers on Fundamentals of Quantum Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 103), 1995.

R. P. Feynman (with an introduction by A. Zee), QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter,
Princeton University Press, 1985, reissued 2014.

$. Weinberg, Light as a Fundamental Particle, Physics Today, vol. 28, по. 6, рр. 32-37, 1975.

J. R. Klauder and E. C. G. Sudarshan, Fundamentals of Quantum Optics, Benjamin, 1968; Dover,
reissued 2006.

Coherence, Quantum Fluctuations, Antibunching, and Photon Statistics

В. В. Masters, Satyendra Nath Bose and Bose-Einstein Statistics, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 40-47, 2013.

H. J. Carmichael, Statistical Methods in Quantum Optics 2: Non-Classical Fields, Springer-Verlag,
2010.

R. J. Glauber, Quantum Theory of Optical Coherence: Selected Papers and Lectures, Wiley-VCH,
2007.

R. J. Glauber, Nobel Lecture: One Hundred Years of Light Quanta, Reviews of Modern Physics,
vol. 78, рр. 1267—1278, 2006.

Z. Ficek and S. Swain, Quantum Interference and Coherence: Theory and Experiments, Springer-
Verlag, 2005.

J. Рейпа, ed., Coherence and Statistics of Photons and Atoms, Wiley, 2001.

Н. J. Carmichael, Statistical Methods in Quantum Optics 1: Master Equations and Fokker—Planck
Equations, Springer-Verlag, 1999.

L. Mandel and E. Wolf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 1995.

L. Mandel and E. Wolf, eds., Selected Papers on Coherence and Fluctuations of Light (1850-1966),
SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 19), 1990.

R. A. Campos, B. E. A. Saleh, and M. C. Teich, Quantum-Mechanical Lossless Beam Splitter: SU(2)
Symmetry and Photon Statistics, Physical Review A, vol. 40, pp. 1371-1384, 1989.

E. R. Pike and H. Walther, eds., Photons and Quantum Fluctuations, CRC Press, 1988.

M. C. Teich and B. E. A. Saleh, Photon Bunching and Antibunching, in E. Wolf, ed., Progress in
Optics, North-Holland, 1988, vol. 26, pp. 1-104.

J. Рейпа, Coherence of Light, Reidel, 2nd ed. 1985.

Е. Wolf, Einstein’s Researches on the Nature of Light, Optics News, vol. 5, по. 1, pp. 24-39, 1979.

В. Е. A. Saleh, Photoelectron Statistics, Springer-Verlag, 1978.

H. J. Kimble, M. Dagenais, and L. Mandel, Photon Antibunching in Resonance Fluorescence, Phys-
ical Review Letters, vol. 39, pp. 691-695, 1977.

W. H. Louisell, Quantum Statistical Properties of Radiation, Wiley, 1973; Wiley-VCH, reprinted
1990.

552 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS

L. Mandel and E. Wolf, eds., Selected Papers on Coherence and Fluctuations of Light, Volumes 1
and 2, Dover, 1970.

L. Mandel, Fluctuations of Light Beams, in E. Wolf, ed., Progress in Optics, North-Holland, 1963,
vol. 2, pp. 181-248.

S. N. Bose, Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese (Planck’s Law and the Light-Quantum Hy-
pothesis), Zeitschrift fiir Physik, vol. 26, pp. 178-181, 1924.

Quadrature-Squeezed and Photon-Number-Squeezed Light

Х. He, М. Е Hartmann, X. Ма, У. Kim, В. Шу, J. L. Blackburn, У. Gao, J. Kono, У. Yomogida,
A. Hirano, Т. Tanaka, H. Kataura, H. Htoon, and $. К. Doorn, Tunable Room-Temperature Single-
Photon Emission at Telecom Wavelengths from sp? Defects in Carbon Nanotubes, Nature Pho-
tonics, vol. 11, pp. 577—582, 2017.

H. Vahlbruch, М. Mehmet, К. Danzmann, and В. Schnabel, Detection of 15 dB Squeezed States
of Light and their Application for the Absolute Calibration of Photoelectric Quantum Efficiency,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 117, 110801, 2016.

J. Aasi et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration), Enhanced Sensitivity of the LIGO Gravitational Wave
Detector by Using Squeezed States of Light, Nature Photonics, vol. 7, pp. 613-619, 2013.

H. J. Carmichael, Statistical Methods in Quantum Optics 2: Non-Classical Fields, Springer-Verlag,
2010.

M. C. Teich and B. E. A. Saleh, Squeezed and Antibunched Light, Physics Today, vol. 43, no. 6,
рр. 26-34, 1990 (Erratum: vol. 43, no. 11, рр. 123—124, 1990).

M. C. Teich and B. E. A. Saleh, Squeezed States of Light, Quantum Optics: Journal of the European
Physical Society B, vol. 1, pp. 153-191, 1989.

К. Е. Slusher, L. W. Hollberg, В. Yurke, J. С. Mertz, and J. Е. Valley, Observation of Squeezed States
Generated by Four-Wave Mixing in an Optical Cavity, Physical Review Letters, vol. 55, pp. 2409-
2412, 1985.

М. С. Teich and В. Е. A. Saleh, Observation of Sub-Poisson Franck—Hertz Light at 253.7 nm, Journal
of the Optical Society of America В, vol. 2, pp. 275-282, 1985.

D. Stoler, B. E. A. Saleh, and M. C. Teich, Binomial States of the Quantized Radiation Field, Optica
Acta (Journal of Modern Optics), vol. 32, pp. 345-355, 1985.

R. Short and L. Mandel, Observation of Sub-Poissonian Photon Statistics, Physical Review Letters,
vol. 51, pp. 384—387, 1983.

С. М. Caves, Quantum-Mechanical Noise in an Interferometer, Physical Review О, vol. 23, pp. 1693—
1708, 1981.

Entangled-Photon and Two-Photon Light

J. Wang, $. Paesani, У. Ding, К. Santagati, Р. Skrzypezyk, A. Salavrakos, J. Tura, К. Augusiak,
L. Manéinska, О. Bacco, О. Bonneau, J. W. Silverstone, О. Gong, A. Ас, К. Rottwitt, L. K. Ox-
enlgwe, J. L. O’Brien, A. Laing, and М. С. Thompson, Multidimensional Quantum Entanglement
With Large-Scale Integrated Optics, Science, vol. 360, рр. 285—291, 2018.

M. A. Finger, T. Sh. Iskhakov, N. Y. Joly, M. V. Chekhova, and P. St. J. Russell, Raman-Free,
Noble-Gas-Filled Photonic-Crystal Fiber Source for Ultrafast, Very Bright Twin-Beam Squeezed
Vacuum, Physical Review Letters, vol. 115, 143602, 2015.

D. Kang, M. Kim, H. He, and A. S. Helmy, Two Polarization-Entangled Sources from the Same
Semiconductor Chip, Physical Review A, vol. 92, 013821, 2015.

Е. Вошег, A. Orieux, С. Autebert, A. Lemaitre, Е. Galopin, С. Manquest, С. Sirtori, I. Favero, G. Leo,
and S. Ducci, Electrically Injected Photon-Pair Source at Room Temperature, Physical Review
Letters, vol. 112, 183901, 2014.

M. F. Saleh, G. Di Giuseppe, B. E. A. Saleh, and M. C. Teich, Photonic Circuits for Generating
Modal, Spectral, and Polarization Entanglement, IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 2, рр. 736-752,
2010.

M. B. Nasr, S. Carrasco, B. E. A. Saleh, A. V. Sergienko, M. C. Teich, J. P. Torres, L. Torner,
D. S. Hum, and M. M. Fejer, Ultrabroadband Biphotons Generated via Chirped Quasi-Phase-
Matched Optical Parametric Down-Conversion, Physical Review Letters, vol. 100, 183601, 2008.

J. Audretsch, Entangled Systems, Wiley-VCH, 2007.

READING LIST 553

J. $. Bell (with an introduction by A. Aspect), Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics,
Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2004.

В.Е. A. Saleh, A. Е. Abouraddy, А. У. Sergienko, and М. С. Teich, Duality Between Partial Coher-
ence and Partial Entanglement, Physical Review A, vol. 62, 043816, 2000.

р. М. Klyshko, Photons and Nonlinear Optics, Nauka (Moscow), 1980 [Translation: Gordon and
Breach, New York, 1988).

A. Aspect, P. Grangier, and G. Roger, Experimental Tests of Realistic Local Theories via Bell’s
Theorem, Physical Review Letters, vol. 47, pp. 460-463, 1981.

D.C. Burnham and D. L. Weinberg, Observation of Simultaneity in Parametric Production of Optical
Photon Pairs, Physical Review Letters, vol. 25, pp. 84-87, 1970.

D. Magde and H. Mahr, Study in Ammonium Dihydrogen Phosphate of Spontaneous Parametric
Interaction Tunable from 4400 to 16 000 A, Physical Review Letters, vol. 18, рр. 905-907, 1967.

S. E. Harris, M. K. Oshman, and R. L. Byer, Observation of Tunable Optical Parametric Fluorescence,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 18, pp. 732-734, 1967.

A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality
Be Considered Complete?, Physical Review, vol. 47, рр. 777—780, 1935.

Е. Schrédinger, Die gegenwdrtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik, Die Naturwissenschaften,
vol. 23, pp. 807-812, 823-828, 844-849; 1935 [Translation: The Present Situation in Quantum
Mechanics: A Translation of Schrédinger’s ‘Cat Paradox’ Paper, Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society, vol. 124, pp. 323-338, 1980].

Quantum Imaging, Metrology, Lithography, and Spectroscopy

D. S. Simon, G. Jaeger, A. V. Sergienko, Quantum Metrology, Imaging, and Communication,
Springer-Verlag, 2017.

М. А. Taylor, J. Janousek, У. Daria, J. Knittel, B. Hage, H.-A. Bachor, and W. P. Bowen, Subdiffraction-
Limited Quantum Imaging within a Living Cell, Physical Review X, vol. 4, 011017, 2014.

T. Ono, R. Okamoto, and S. Takeuchi, An Entanglement-Enhanced Microscope, Nature Communi-
cations 4, 2426 doi: 10.1038/ncomms3426, 2013.

М. С. Teich, В. Е. A. Saleh, F. М. С. Wong, and J. H. Shapiro, Variations on the Theme of Quantum
Optical Coherence Tomography: A Review, Quantum Information Processing, vol. 11, pp. 903-
923, 2012.

M. B. Nasr, D. P. Goode, N. Nguyen, G. Rong, L. Yang, B. M. Reinhard, B. E. A. Saleh, and
M. C. Teich, Quantum Optical Coherence Tomography of a Biological Sample, Optics Commu-
nications, vol. 282, pp. 1154—1159, 2009.

M. B. Nasr, B. E. A. Saleh, A. V. Sergienko, and M. C. Teich, Demonstration of Dispersion-Cancelled
Quantum-Optical Coherence Tomography, Physical Review Letters, vol. 91, 083601, 2003.

А.Е. Abouraddy, В. Е. A. Saleh, А. У. Sergienko, and М. С. Teich, Entangled-Photon Fourier Optics,
Journal of the Optical Society of America В, vol. 19, pp. 1174—1184, 2002.

A. F. Abouraddy, B. E. A. Saleh, A. V. Sergienko, and M. C. Teich, Role of Entanglement in Two-
Photon Imaging, Physical Review Letters, vol. 87, 123602, 2001.

A. F. Abouraddy, B. E. A. Saleh, A. V. Sergienko, and M. C. Teich, Quantum Holography, Optics
Express, vol. 9, pp. 498—505, 2001.

А. М. Boto, P. Kok, О. 5. Abrams, 5. L. Braunstein, С. P. Williams, and J. Р. Dowling, Quantum Inter-
ferometric Optical Lithography: Exploiting Entanglement to Beat the Diffraction Limit, Physical
Review Letters, vol. 85, pp. 2733-2736, 2000.

B.E. A. Saleh, B. M. Jost, H.-B. Fei, and M. C. Teich, Entangled-Photon Virtual-State Spectroscopy,
Physical Review Letters, vol. 80, pp. 3483-3486, 1998.

M. C. Teich and B. E. A. Saleh, Entangled-Photon Microscopy, Spectroscopy, and Display, U.S.
Patent 5,796,477, Patented August 18, 1998.

Quantum Information, Communications, Computing, and Cryptography

I. Khan, B. Heim, A. Neuzner, and C. Marquardt, Satellite-Based QKD, Optics & Photonics News,
vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 26-33, 2018.

M. M. Wilde, Quantum Information Theory, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2017.

J. Yin et al., Satellite-Based Entanglement Distribution Over 1200 Kilometers, Science, vol. 356,
pp. 1140-1144, 2017.

554 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS

M. Hayashi, S. Ishizaka, A. Kawachi, G. Kimura, and T. Ogawa, Introduction to Quantum Informa-
tion Science, Springer-Verlag, 2015.

J. Carolan, С. Harrold, С. Sparrow, Е. Martin-Lopez, М. J. Russell, J. W. Silverstone, P. J. Shad-
bolt, М. Matsuda, М. Oguma, М. Itoh, G. О. Marshall, М. G. Thompson, J. С. Е. Matthews,
T. Hashimoto, J. L. O’Brien, and A. Laing, Universal Linear Optics, Science, vol. 349, pp. 711-
716, 2015.

I. A. Walmsley, Quantum Optics: Science and Technology in a New Light, Science, vol. 348, pp. 525-
530, 2015.

J. A. Bergou and M. Hillery, Introduction to the Theory of Quantum Information Processing,
Springer-Verlag, 2013.

J. A. Jones and D. Jaksch, Quantum Information, Computation and Communication, Cambridge
University Press, 2012.

В. Т. Perry, Quantum Computing from the Ground Up, World Scientific, 2012.

A. Zeilinger, Dance of the Photons: From Einstein to Quantum Teleportation, Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2010.

S. M. Barnett, Quantum Information, Oxford University Press, 2009.

G. Jaeger, Entanglement, Information, and the Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, Springer-
Verlag, 2009.

J. Г. O’Brien, A. Furusawa, and J. Vuékovic, Photonic Quantum Technologies, Nature Photonics,
vol. 3, pp. 687-695, 2009.

H. Paul, Introduction to Quantum Optics: From Light Quanta to Quantum Teleportation, Cambridge
University Press, 2004.

M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, Cambridge
University Press, 2002.

PROBLEMS

13.1-5 Photon Energy.

(a) What voltage should be applied to an electrode to accelerate an electron from zero
velocity such that it acquires the same energy as a photon of wavelength Л. = 0.87 им?

(b) A photon of wavelength 1.06 ила is combined with a photon of wavelength 10.6 wm to
create a photon whose energy is the sum of the energies of the two photons. What is the
wavelength of the resultant photon? This process, known as sum-frequency generation,
is illustrated in Fig. 22.2-6.

13.1-6 Position of a Single Photon at a Screen. Consider monochromatic light of wavelength A,
incident on an infinite screen in the plane z = 0, with an intensity Г(р) = Ip exp(—p/po),
where р = ,/x? + y?. Assume that the intensity of the source is reduced to a level at which
only a single photon strikes the screen.

(a) Find the probability that the photon strikes the screen within a radius ро of the origin.
(b) If the incident light contains exactly 10° photons, how many photons strike within a
circle of radius ро on average?

13.1-7 Photon Momentum. Compare the magnitude of the total momentum in all of the photons
in a 10-J laser pulse with that of:

(a) a 1-8 mass moving at a velocity of 1 cm/s.
(b) an electron moving at a velocity c,/10.
*13.1-8 Momentum of a Photon in a Gaussian Beam.
(a) What is the probability that the momentum vector of a photon associated with a Gaus-
sian beam of waist radius Wo lies within the beam divergence angle 69? Refer to Sec. 3.1
for definitions.
(b) Does the relation p = E/c, hold in this case? Explain.

PROBLEMS 555

13.1-9 Levitation by Light Pressure. An isolated hydrogen atom has mass 1.67 x 10-27 ke.

(a) Find the gravitational force on this hydrogen atom near the surface of the earth (assume
that at sea level the gravitational acceleration constant g = 9.8 m/ 57).

(b) Let an upwardly directed laser beam emitting 1-eV photons be focused in such а way
that the full momentum of each of its photons is transferred to the atom. Find the average
upward force on the atom provided by one photon striking each second.

(c) Find the number of photons that must strike the atom per second, and the corresponding
optical power, for it not to fall under the effect of gravity, assuming ideal conditions in
vacuum.

(d) How many photons per second would be required to keep the atom from falling if it
were perfectly reflecting?

*13.1-10 Single Photon in a Fabry—Perot Resonator. Consider a Fabry—Perot resonator of length
d = 1 cm that contains nonabsorbing material of refractive index n = 1.5 and perfectly
reflecting mirrors. Assume that there is exactly one photon in the mode described by the
standing wave sin(10°72/d).

(a) Determine the photon wavelength and energy (in eV).

(b) Estimate the uncertainty in the photon’s position and momentum (magnitude and direc-
tion). Compare with the value obtained from the relation 0,0, = h/2.

13.1-11  Single-Photon Beating (Time Interference). Consider a detector illuminated by a poly-
chromatic plane wave consisting of two superposed monochromatic waves traveling in the
same direction. The constituent waves have complex wavefunctions given by
with frequencies и and v2 and intensities J; and 15, respectively. In accordance with
Sec. 2.6B, the intensity of this wave is given by I(t) = I, +15 +2115 cos[27(v2—-1)t].
Assume that the two constituent plane waves have equal intensities (I; = J2) and that the
wave is sufficiently weak so that only a single polychromatic photon reaches the detector
during the time interval T = 1/|v2 — и |.

(a) Sketch the probability density p(t) for detecting the photon in the interval 0 < t <
1/|v2—v,|. At what time instant during Т is the probability density zero that the photon
will be detected?

(b) An attempt to discover from which of the two constituent waves the photon arrives
entails an energy measurement with a precision better than

СЕ < В — и |.
Use the time—energy uncertainty relation to show that the time required for such a mea-
surement is of the order of the beat-frequency period. This signifies that the very process
of measurement washes out the interference and thereby precludes the measurement
from being made.

13.1-12 Photon Momentum Exchange at a Beamsplitter. Consider a single photon, in a mode
described by a plane wave, impinging on a lossless beamsplitter. What is the momentum
vector of the photon before it impinges on the mirror? What are the possible values of
the momentum vector of the photon, and the probabilities of observing these values, after
passage through the beamsplitter?

13.2-2 Photon Flux. Demonstrate that the power of a monochromatic optical beam that carries
an average of one photon per optical cycle is inversely proportional to the square of the
wavelength.

13.2-3 The Poisson Distribution. Verify that the Poisson probability distribution provided in
(13.2-12) is normalized to unity and has mean 7 and variance о? = п.

13.2-4 Photon Statistics of a Coherent Gaussian Beam. Assume that a 100-pW single-mode
He-Ne laser emits light at 633 nm ша ТЕМоо Gaussian beam (Sec. 3.1).

(a) What is the mean number of photons crossing a circle of radius equal to the waist radius
of the beam Wp in atime Т = 100 ns?

(b) What is the root-mean-square value of the number of photons in (a)?

(c) What is the probability that the number of photons is zero in (a)?

556 CHAPTER 13 PHOTON OPTICS
13.2-5 The Bose-Einstein Distribution.

(a) Verify that the Bose-Einstein probability distribution provided in (13.2-20) is normal-
ized and has mean 7 and variance о? = 7+ п?.

(b) If a stream of photons obeying Bose-Einstein statistics contains an average of Ф = 1
photon per nanosecond, what is the probability that zero photons will be detected in a
20-ns time interval?

*13.2-6 The Negative-Binomial Distribution. It is well known in the literature of probability
theory that the sum of M identically distributed random variables, each with a geometric
(Bose-Einstein) distribution, obeys the negative binomial distribution with overall mean п,

n+M-1 n/M)"
p(n) = И.
п (1+ n/M)r+

Verify that the negative-binomial distribution reduces to the Bose—Einstein distribution for

М = Тапа to the Poisson distribution as М — со.

*13.2-7 Photon-Number Statistics for Multimode Thermal Light in a Cavity. Consider М
modes of thermal radiation sufficiently close to each other in frequency that each can be
considered to be occupied in accordance with a Bose-Einstein distribution of the same
mean photon number 1 /[ехр(Ри/КТ) — 1]. Show that the variance of the total number of
photons n is related to its mean by п?

2_ 5 —
9, =П + м )

which indicates that multimode thermal light has less variance than does single-mode ther-

mal light. The presence of the multiple modes provides averaging, thereby reducing the

noisiness of the light.

*13.2-8 Photon-Number Statistics for a Beam of Multimode Thermal Light. A multimode ther-
mal light source that carries M identical modes, each with an exponentially distributed
(random) integrated rate, has an overall probability density p(w) describable by the gamma
density

LO)" xe w
w) = | -— |, w > 0.
v0) = Gag (Ge) eo Cara 7

Use Mandel’s formula (13.2-26) to show that the resulting photon-number distribution

assumes the form of the negative-binomial distribution defined in Prob. 13.2-6.

*13.2-9 Mean and Variance of the Doubly Stochastic Poisson Distribution. Prove (13.2-27) and
(13.2-28).

*13.2-10 Random Partitioning of Coherent Light.

(a) Use (13.2-33) to show that the photon-number distribution of randomly partitioned
coherent light retains its Poisson form.

(b) Show explicitly that the mean photon number for light reflected from a lossless beam-
splitter is (1 — Т) п.

(c) Prove (13.2-34) for coherent light.

13.2-11 Random Partitioning of Single-Mode Thermal Light.

(a) Use (13.2-33) to show that the photon-number distribution of randomly partitioned
single-mode thermal light retains its Bose-Einstein form.

(b) Show explicitly that the mean photon number for light reflected from a lossless beam-
splitter is (1 — Т) п.

(c) Prove (13.2-35) for single-mode thermal light.

*13,.2-12 Exponential Decay of Mean Photon Number in an Absorber.

(a) Consider an absorptive material of thickness d and absorption coefficient a (cm7'). If
the average number of photons entering the material is По, write a differential equation
to find the average number of photons 7 (2) at position x, where x is the depth into the
material (0 < 7 < а).

(b) Solve the differential equation. State why your result turns out to be the exponential
decay law obtained in electromagnetic optics (Sec. 5.5A).

PROBLEMS 557

(c) If the incident light is coherent, write an expression for the photon-number distribution
p(n) at an arbitrary position 2 into the absorber.

(d) What is the probability that a single photon incident on the absorber survives passage
through it?

*13.3-1 Statistics of the Binomial Photon-Number Distribution. The binomial probability dis-
tribution, which is written as
м!
p(n) = М пут! (1—p)“",

describes the photon-number statistics for certain sources of photon-number-squeezed

light.

(a) Indicate a plausible mechanism whereby number-state light is converted into light de-
scribed by binomial photon statistics.

(b) Prove that the binomial probability distribution is normalized to unity.

(с) Find the photon-number mean И and the photon-number variance о? of the binomial
probability distribution in terms of its two parameters, p and M.

(4) Find an expression for the SNR in terms of п and р. Evaluate the SNR for the limiting
cases p — 0 and p — 1. What is the nature of the light corresponding to those two
limits?

*13.3-2 Noisiness of the Uniform Photon-Number Distribution. Consider a light source that
generates a photon stream with the discrete-uniform photon-number distribution
фт 0<л<2п
p(n) = $ 2n7+1
0, otherwise.

(a) Verify that the distribution is normalized to unity and has mean п. Calculate the photon-
number variance о? and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and compare these quantities
with those for the Bose-Einstein and Poisson distributions of the same mean.

(b) In terms of SNR, would this source be quieter or noisier than an ideal single-mode laser
when п < 2? When п = 2? When n > 2?

(c) By what factor is the SNR for this light larger than that for single-mode thermal light?

(d) Suggest a mechanism for generating light with this photon-number distribution.

seful formulas:
1 See О. Stoler, В. Е. A. Saleh, and М. С. Teich, Binomial States of Фе Quantized Radiation Field, Optica
Acta (Journal of Modern Optics), vol. 32, pp. 345-355, 1985.


FUNDAMENTALS OF

PHOTONICS

Part Il: Photonics

(Chapters 14—25)

[J

—_

In
я

| —


CHAPTER
ee
LIGHT AND MATTER
14.1 ENERGY LEVELS 562

A. Atoms
В. lons and Doped Dielectric Media
C. Molecules
D. Solids
14.2 OCCUPATION OF ENERGY LEVELS 581
A. Boltzmann Distribution
В. FermiDirac Distribution
14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 583
A. Interaction of Single-Mode Light with an Atom
B. Spontaneous Emission
C. Stimulated Emission and Absorption
D. Line Broadening
*E. Enhanced Spontaneous Emission
*F. Laser Cooling, Laser Trapping, and Atom Optics
14.4 THERMAL LIGHT 602
A. Thermal Equilibrium Between Photons and Atoms
B. Blackbody Radiation Spectrum
14.5 LUMINESCENCE AND SCATTERING 607
A. Forms of Luminescence
B. Photoluminescence
C. Scattering
3 3
Niels Bohr Albert Einstein
(1885-1962) (1879-1955)
Bohr and Einstein laid the theoretical foundations for describing the interaction of light with matter.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa Е. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
561

CSC
Light interacts with matter because matter contains electric charges. The time-varying
electric field of light interacts with the electric charges and dipoles of atoms, molecules,
and solids. A photon may interact with an atom (or ion) if its energy matches the differ-
ence between two atomic energy levels. The allowed energy levels and energy bands
of matter are determined by the rules of quantum mechanics. If the atom is initially
in the lower energy level, the photon may impart its energy to the atom and thereby
raise it to the higher level; the photon is then said to be absorbed (or annihilated).
Alternatively, if the atom is in the higher energy level, the photon may stimulate the
atom to undergo a transition to the lower level, resulting in the emission (or creation)
of a second photon whose energy is equal to the difference between the atomic energy
levels. Under appropriate circumstances, stimulated emission can lead to laser action.

Thermal excitations cause the atoms of matter to constantly undergo upward and
downward transitions among their allowed energy levels via the absorption and emis-
sion of photons. For blackbodies in thermal equilibrium, under steady-state conditions
the resulting collection of photons and atoms produces thermal light. All blackbodies
whose temperatures lie above absolute zero radiate thermal light, which has a distribu-
tion of frequencies known as the blackbody radiation spectrum. As the temperature of
the object increases, the higher atomic energy levels become increasingly populated,
causing the peak of the blackbody radiation spectrum to shift toward higher frequencies
(shorter wavelengths).

Photon emission may also be instigated by external sources of energy other than
thermal excitations. Exposure to sound waves, electric currents, ultraviolet radiation,
and chemical reactions can cause materials to emit light called luminescence. Light
can also interact with atoms via scattering and dispersive (gradient or dipole) forces.
A photon incident on a material that has its direction and energy altered via scattering
often serves to elucidate the internal energy levels of the material, such as those asso-
ciated with molecular vibrations. Yet other processes can also result in the emission
of light; examples include charged particles traveling faster than the velocity of light
in a medium (Cerenkov radiation) and the deceleration of charged particles as they
penetrate matter (Bremsstrahlung).

This Chapter
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the laws responsible for the generation
of laser, thermal, and luminescence light. The chapter begins with a brief review of
the generic energy levels associated with different types of matter (Sec. 14.1) and the
occupation of these energy levels (Sec. 14.2). In Sec. 14.3 we discuss the absorption
and emission of photons by an atom; those results form the basis of the operation
of laser amplifiers and oscillators, as set forth in Chapters 15 and 16, respectively. The
interaction of many photons with many atoms, under conditions of thermal equilibrium
and steady state, is considered in Sec. 14.4. Finally, an overview of luminescence and
light scattering is provided in Sec. 14.5.

14.1 ENERGY LEVELS
The atoms of matter may exist in relative isolation, as in the case of a dilute atomic gas,
or they may interact with neighboring atoms to form molecules, liquids, and solids. The
constituents of matter obey the laws of quantum mechanics.

The behavior of a single nonrelativistic particle of mass m (an electron, for exam-
ple) in a potential is governed by a complex wavefunction W (r,t) that satisfies the
562

144 ENERGYLEVELS 563

Schrédinger equation’

i? _» ., OW(r, t)

Sm W(r,t) + V(r, t) U(r, t) gh an (14.1-1)
The potential energy V(r, t) characterizes the environment of the particle, including
contributions from externally applied fields. The partial differential equation displayed
in (14.1-1) thus has an enormous variety of solutions, depending on the form of V(r, t).
Systems that comprise multiple particles, such as atoms, ions, molecules, liquids, and
solids, obey a more complex version of this equation in which the potential energy
contains terms that accommodate interactions among the particles. Equation (14.1-1)
is mathematically similar to the paraxial Helmholtz equation of wave optics (2.2-23)
and to the paraxial slowly varying envelope equation of ultrafast optics (23.1-24).

The Born postulate of quantum mechanics specifies that the probability of finding
the particle within an incremental volume dV surrounding the position r, in the time
interval between t and t + dt, is

p(r,t) dV dt = |W(r, t)|? dV dt. (14.1-2)
Equation (14.1-2) resembles (13.1-15) for the probability of finding a photon within an
incremental area and time.

In the absence of a time-varying potential, the allowed energy levels E of the par-
ticle are determined by using the technique of separation of variables. This leads to a
solution of (14.1-1) of the form U(r, t) = Ф(г) exp[j(E/h)t], where w(r) satisfies the
time-independent Schrédinger equation

0? _ 5
on™ w(r) + Vir)v(r) = Ey(r). (14.1-3)
Equation (14.1-3), which is similar to the Helmholtz equation (2.2-7), may be regarded
as an eigenvalue problem for which the allowed values of the energy E are the eigen-
values, while the solutions (г) are the eigenfunctions (Appendix С).

Systems of multiple particles obey a generalized form of (14.1-3). The solutions
provide the allowed values of the energy E of the system. These values can be discrete
(as for an atom), or continuous (as for a free particle), or can comprise sets of densely
packed discrete levels called bands (as for a semiconductor). The presence of thermal
excitation, or of an external field such as light illuminating the material, can induce
the system to move from one of its energy levels to another. This provides a means by
which the system can exchange energy with the outside world.

In the following sections we schematically illustrate typical energy-level structures
for selected atoms, ions, molecules, and solids.

A. Atoms

Atomic energy levels are established by the potential energies of the electrons in the
presence of the atomic nucleus and the other electrons, as well as by interactions
involving the orbital and spin angular momenta, which are usually much weaker than
those involving charges. Isolated atoms such as Ne, Cu, and Cd, among others, serve
as active laser media.

* The Schrédinger equation is cast in a form commonly used in electrical engineering. As explained in the
footnote on page 47, correspondence with the form usually used in the physics literature is attained by simply
replacing —j with i, where 7 = i = /—1. Of course, this choice has no bearing on the final results.

564 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Hydrogen
Energy levels. The energy levels of a hydrogen-like atom comprising a nucleus of
charge +Ze, where Z is the atomic number (Z = 1 for H), and a single electron of
charge —e and mass mo, are determined by inserting the Coulomb potential energy,
V(r) = —Ze?/4re or, in the time-independent Schrédinger equation (14.1-3). Since
V(r) is a function of the radial coordinate alone, the Laplacian may be written in spher-
ical coordinates, whereupon the partial differential equation splits into three ordinary
differential equations via separation of variables. This leads to a ready solution for the
eigenvalue problem, in which the eigenvalues comprise an infinite number of discrete
energy levels with values а
M,Z-e 1
Ey (те 218 n2’ n=1,2,3,..., (14.1-4)
where the reduced mass of the atom М, replaces the electron mass mo to accom-
modate the finite mass of the nucleus. The energy levels in (14.1-4), which are char-
acterized by a single quantum number n called the principal quantum number, are
displayed in Fig. 14.1-1 for H and СЗ+.
eV eV
H Cc
14 = 504 Figure 14.1-1 Energy levels of a hy-
4— drogen atom (Z = 1; left ordinate) and
12 ов о 432 а С?З+ ion (a hydrogen-like atom with
у Z = 6; right ordinate). In this depiction,
= 10 2 360 © the arbitrary zero of energy is placed at
к К Фе ground-state level (п = 1), which
5 8 288 > lies = 13.6 eV below the ionization
5 5 energy level (п = со) for hydrogen
аб 216 4 and = 489.8 eV below the ionization
energy level for C°+. The n = 3 to
4 144 п = 2 transition for C+, indicated
by the red vertical arrow, corresponds to
2 72 the extreme-ultraviolet laser transition at
| 18.2 nm, as discussed in Sec. 16.3F.
ol 0
Bohr theory. In the context of the Bohr atom associated with the old quan-
tum theory, the energy levels provided in (14.1-4) can be obtained by equating the
Coulomb force of attraction to the centrifugal force required to keep the electron
in a circular orbit, while assuming that the electron orbital angular momentum is
quantized to integer multiples of h. The radii of these Bohr orbits turn out to be г, =
(47) nh? /moZe?, п = 1,2,3,.... The radius of the lowest angular-momentum
Bohr orbit for hydrogen, a9 = rty=1,z=1; А 0.053 nm, is known as the Bohr radius.
The associated Bohr period is given by То = 2лабто/Й = 150 as.
Quantum numbers. The eigenfunctions of the Schrddinger equation take the form
of a product of three functions, сш (т,0,Ф) = Rue(r) Он. (0) Фи. ($), where п =
1,2,3,...is the principal quantum number; / = 0,1, 2,...,n — 1 is the azimuthal
quantum number; and m = 0,+1,+2,...,+¢ is the magnetic quantum number.
Here, the Rye(r) represent associated Laguerre functions (which are related to the
generalized Laguerre polynomials discussed in the footnote on page 103); the Opn (A)
are associated Legendre functions; and the ®,,(@) are phase functions. These solu-
tions bear some similarity to those for the microsphere microresonator discussed in
Sec. 11.4C. Incorporating the intrinsic spin of the electron requires a fourth quantum
number known as the spin quantum number: s = +1/2.

144 ENERGYLEVELS 565
Fine structure, hyperfine structure, and relativistic effects. The electromagnetic
interaction between the magnetic dipole moment associated with the electron spin
and the magnetic field generated by the orbital angular momentum of the electron
rotating about the nucleus is referred to as spin-orbit coupling. It serves to split
the otherwise degenerate energy levels of the hydrogen atom into closely spaced, but
distinct, components called fine structure. The electron spin and its orbital angular
momentum also interact with the nuclear magnetic dipole moment to produce yet finer
splittings, called hyperfine structure. Other interactions (e.g., spin-spin coupling)
are also present, but are negligible. All of these effects cause the energy levels of
hydrogen to differ slightly from those specified in (14.1-4). Relativistic shifts of the
energy levels, which are small but measurable, can be accommodated by using the
relativistically invariant Dirac equation in place of the nonrelativistic Schrodinger
equation. The Dirac equation also intrinsically gives rise to the existence of electron
spin and antiparticles such as the positron.
Multielectron Atoms
Shells and subshells. Multielectron atoms comprise a nucleus of charge +Ze sur-
rounded by Z electrons, each of charge —e. As the atomic number Z increases, the
occupation of successive single-electron states proceeds by minimizing the total energy
while satisfying the Pauli exclusion principle, which provides that, as fermions, no
two electrons may have the same set of four quantum numbers. The electron states thus
fill in the form of shells, designated by the principal quantum number n, each of which
has the capacity to hold a specific number of electrons. Within each shell are con-
stituent subshells, designated by the azimuthal quantum number 6, as specified in spec-
troscopic notation (5, р, 4, f, 9, №, i,... correspond to 6 = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,...,
respectively). The electron configuration п." represents the arrangement of electrons
in the subshells; the superscript u indicates the number of electrons present in each. For
example, the configuration for the ground state of He (Z = 2) is 1s?, its two electrons
just filling the п = 1 shell, for which # = 0. Low-lying excited-state configurations of
He in which one of the electrons has been excited to the п = 2 shell include 1523 and
1s2p. For № (Z = 10), the ground-state configuration is 15228226; its 10 electrons
just fill the n = 1 andn = 2 shells, which accommodate 2 and 8 electrons, respectively.
Energy levels. The energy levels of multielectron atoms can be approximately deter-
mined by using the Schrédinger theory, which is suitable for atoms in which relativistic
effects are insignificant. Because of the myriad Coulomb interactions inherent in a
collection of electrons, the Schrédinger equation is typically solved via an approxi-
mate, self-consistent approach called the Hartree method. Each electron is considered
to move independently in a spherically symmetric net potential, which is taken to be
the sum of the spherically symmetric attractive Coulomb potential arising from the
nucleus and a spherically symmetric repulsive potential representing the average effect
of the Coulomb forces from all other electrons. The Z-electron Schrédinger equation
then splits into Z single-electron Schrodinger equations with an overall eigenfunction
that is a product of the individual-electron eigenfunctions, and a total energy that is the
sum of the energies of the individual electrons. Finally, perturbation theory is used to
accommodate the deviations from spherical symmetry of the repulsive potential and
for interactions involving electron spin. The resultant single-electron eigenfunctions
are closely related to those for the hydrogen atom and are written in the same form.
However, energy formulas similar to (14.1-4) exist only for optically active electrons
such as the valence electrons in alkali atoms.

566 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Electron configuration and term symbol. Electron configurations often have cor-
responding collections of closely spaced energy sublevels that comprise manifolds,
as displayed schematically in Fig. 14.1-2 for Ne. These fine-structure splittings are
principally a consequence of spin-orbit coupling, which introduces level shifts that are
typically 1 part in 10* for H and grow larger as the atomic number Z increases (hy-
perfine shifts are a factor of 10° smaller and relativistic effects can be safely ignored).
For the lighter multielectron atoms, the total orbital angular momentum L and the total
spin angular momentum © are good quantum numbers and the interaction between
them, known as Russell-Saunders or LS coupling, is responsible for the spin-orbit
coupling. Atomic states are then well described by term symbols of the form 28+ д,
which display the various angular momenta: $ is the total spin angular-momentum
quantum number and 28 + 1 is the spin multiplicity (e.g., triplet, singlet); Г is the
total orbital angular-momentum quantum number in spectroscopic notation (uppercase
letters 5, P, О, F,... represent L = 0, 1, 2, 3,..., respectively); and д is the total
overall angular-momentum quantum number. The term symbol for an atom is often
displayed just after the electron configuration. For example, the lowest-lying excited
states of He are denoted 182s 35, and 1s2s 19%, with triplet and singlet multiplicities,
respectively, as shown in Fig. 14.1-2. When all occupied subshells are filled (as is the
case for the ground states of the noble gases as well as for a number of other atoms
such аз Cd and Yb), the term symbol is “So.
He Ne
21 1525 1S 2р555 == 3.39-ши laser 21
20[— 152535 ЕЕ“ 50
= > 2р`4 === 632.8-nm laser
B19 Е —— . 19
2 2 SSS 2p°3p
18 18
И ; 17
2р?35 ЕЕ
16 . . 16
Odd parity Even parity
Figure 14.1-2 Selected excited-state energy levels of He and Ne atoms. Electron configurations
and term symbols are indicated (by convention, the electron-configuration prefix for Ne, 1s?2s?,
corresponding to filled subshells, is suppressed). The energy spacings between the fine-structure
splittings, which are illustrated schematically, are greatly exaggerated. The Ne transitions marked
by red arrows correspond to the wavelengths 3.39 ила and 632.8 nm, as indicated. These common
Ne laser transitions lie in the mid-infrared and visible, respectively (Secs. 15.3E and 16.3G). The
close energy matches between the excited He and Ne energy levels, which are fortuitous, facilitate
excitation of the Ne atoms via collisions in а gas-discharge tube — hence the moniker “He-Ne laser.”
Periodic table. The larger the value of the principal quantum number n, the less
tightly bound are the electrons to the atom because of the moderation of the nuclear
potential by the Coulomb screening provided by the inner electrons. As a result, shells
typically fill in the order п = 1, 2, 3, 4, .... Similarly, the larger the value of 2,
the less tightly bound are the electrons because the electron probability density pro-
gressively shifts toward the atomic periphery. Hence, subshells typically fill in the
order $, р, а, f, .... As a consequence of these successive filling processes, many

144 ENERGYLEVELS 567
properties of the elements are periodic functions of 7, as exemplified by the periodic
table displayed in Fig. 14.1-3. Successive rows of the table correspond to consecutive
values of the principal quantum number n.

Each column of the table contains a group of elements whose physical and chemical
properties bear a certain similarity to each other because they contain the same number
of electrons in their outermost shells (valence electrons). Column (8, for example,
comprises the noble gases, including He and Ne, which are monoatomic and chemi-
cally inert because they have filled outer shells and a large energy difference between
their filled р subshells and the next higher s subshells. Columns (Г) and ©), in contrast,
comprise elements that are highly active chemically and easily form molecules. Each
alkali-metal atom in column (, for example, contains a lone outer electron that it will
readily share with any nearby halogen atom in column (%, which needs just such a lone
electron to complete its outer shell.

OODODOODHOAWMDOHHHeOHD®
ТА УША
Li] He
AY пл ША IVA vA. via vita lle
[ri Ва AIBIRIBIS
Ве [ ]cas | |аша |] Sonia ВИС Е №
Ка М 5 [а
Na|/Mg} ing ve ув we ув —ушв— во пв [АИ ЗИГЕР $ ПСИГАг
«к [т Lv} es) bt Lee ео а Leu а а А sl Le В
К Са Se || Ti} |V_| [Cr] [Mn] | Fe ||Co} [М [Си |Zn}|Ga}|Ge}|As}|Se]|Br||Kr
[eal [sv] sl hve bid lr fal en [Pal а cal Ln [те] [хе
> ВЫ [$ [У || Zr]||Nbj| Мо] | Tc |{Ru}|Rh}|Pd}|Ag}|Cd]| In ||Sn}|Sb]|Te}| I Хе
[esl sll oil a ке оао ее Аа на si [pl Lac же
Cs]||Ba]| 71 || Hf}|Ta}| W]||Re]|Os]| Ir || Pt }|Au||Hg|| T1]|Pb}| Bi}|Po}|At||Rn
* [eel al i feel bbe Se bn is] a [Ds fe [Ca Na [ra] bc) Es) [Og
Fr] [Ва] |103 || Rf] |Db}|S¢}|Bh}|Hs||Mt}|Ds}|Rg}|Cn}|Nh]} Fl [Ме] У | Ts ||Og
tats [а СЫ Pe lal Sn leu а ry) bl Lee kr va
Series |La}|Ce|| Pr ||Nd]|Pm] |Sm]|Eu}|Gd}|Tb Ho} | Er} Ты У [Lu
‘sem [Аа Ра Lu bsp [ры ло end В Les о cd lL
Series |Ac}|Th}|Pa}| U | МР [Pu] [Ам Ст [Bk] [СЕТЕ | |Fm| |Md} [Мо] | Lr
Figure 14.1-3 Periodic table of the elements, with element abbreviations and atomic numbers Z
indicated. Each successive row of the table, called a period, comprises elements containing electrons
that reside in shells designated by the principal quantum number n indicated by the arabic numeral at
left. Each column of the table, called a group, comprises elements with similar physical and chemical
properties, and is designated by an encircled arabic numeral at top. The roman numerals are an older,
but still widely used system for designating the groups; it remains prevalent in semiconductor physics.
The lanthanide and actinide series depicted in the lower portion of the figure reside in rows 6 and 7,
and comprise the successive additions of electrons to the inner 4] and 5f subshells, respectively. The
rare-earth elements comprise the elements in the lanthanide series (except for La itself) plus Sc and
Y. Elements that take the form of gases, liquids, and solids at room temperature are indicated in blue,
yellow, and silver, respectively.

In general, multielectron atoms exhibit an enormous variety of allowed energy lev-
els. Even though optical transitions typically involve only valence electrons, the sheer
abundance of energy levels gives rise to a cornucopia of energy differences, many of
which serve as viable laser wavelengths (Secs. 15.3E and 16.3G indicate but a few).
The energy differences between the excited atomic levels of Ne displayed in Fig. 14.1-
2, for example, extend to several eV, which covers the infrared and optical regions of
the spectrum.

568 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER

Relative atomic mass. The nucleus of an element of fixed atomic number Z contains
Z protons and an assembly of neutrons. Different isotopes of a given element all
contain Z protons, but different numbers of neutrons. Naturally occurring elements
often comprise a collection of isotopes; the abundance-weighted relative atomic mass
of a particular sample of the element is denoted A,. Mononuclidic elements, such
as “= 3Na, have a single naturally occurring (or strongly dominant) isotope. Just as
elementary particles are either bosons or fermions (Sec. 13.1D), so too are composite
particles such as atoms. If the total number of constituent fermions (electrons, protons,
and neutrons) in the atom is even (odd), it is a composite boson (fermion), and has
integer (half-integer) spin. Examples of bosonic atoms are $He and 7/Na; examples
of fermionic atoms are 3He, 77Na, and г. Bosons and fermions obey Bose-Einstein
and Fermi—Dirac statistics, respectively.

External fields. The application of an external magnetic or electric field to an atom
serves to split and modify otherwise degenerate energy levels via the Zeeman effect
and Stark effect, respectively. The Zeeman effect results from the interaction of an
external magnetic field with the overall magnetic dipole moment of an atom (including
its orbital and spin components). The Stark effect, which is the electric-field analog
of the Zeeman effect, results from the interaction of an external electric field with the
induced electric dipole moment of the atom. Splittings resulting from an applied AC
electric field are said to arise from the AC Stark effect. The magnitudes of both the
Zeeman and Stark energy splittings increase with increasing field strength. Both effects
play important roles in laser cooling and trapping, as well as in other applications.
Ionization energies. The ionization energy of a neutral atom is the energy necessary
to remove its most loosely bound valence electron to the vacuum, leaving behind a
cation. In each row of the periodic table presented in Fig. 14.1-3, the ionization energy
generally increases as one moves to the right, exhibiting a minimum for the alkali metal
in column (Г) (which has only a single electron outside a closed shell), and a maximum
for the noble gas in column (8 (which has a closed shell). The energy of the electron
in the ground state of hydrogen, for example, is —13.6 eV with respect to the vacuum
level (Fig. 14.1-1), so the ionization energy of hydrogen is W = 13.6 eV. It is also
possible to ionize a multielectron atom by removing an inner-shell electron, which has
a far higher ionization energy; and to create highly ionized multielectron atoms, in
which multiple electrons are removed (Sec. 16.3F).

B. lons and Doped Dielectric Media

The removal of one or more electrons from an atom leaves behind a residual cation with
its own electron configuration and term symbol. Though the energy levels associated
with the core electrons remain the same as those of the parent atom, the subshells in
which the optically active electrons reside are unique to the ion, as are their energy
levels. Much as with multielectron atoms, ions offer an enormous variety of energy
levels and potential laser wavelengths. Among the earliest lasers to be developed were
ionic gas lasers that relied on the energy levels of noble-gas ions such as Art and Кг",
created from their respective neutral atoms in a gas-discharge tube (Sec. 16.3E). Solid-
state lasers that relied on the energy levels of lanthanide-metal ions, such as Na’+
substituting for a small fraction of the У3+ ions in a УзАБО12 crystal, were developed
in the very same year (1964). However, by virtue of their superior performance and
robustness, solid-state lasers have nearly totally eclipsed ionic gas lasers, except in the
most specialized of applications.

144 ENERGYLEVELS 569

Much as with atoms, the energy levels of the laser ions are established via quantum-
mechanical calculations or, as is more often the case in practice, empirically. Transition-
metal and lanthanide-metal ions are generally used as dopants for solid-state laser
amplifiers and lasers (Secs. 15.3 and 16.3A). The host media are usually insulating
ionic or covalent dielectrics that are transparent in a particular region of the spectrum,
with suitable optical, thermal, and mechanical properties. The optical properties of
dielectric materials were considered in Sec. 5.5C in the context of the Lorentz oscillator
model, which is suitable for characterizing transparent host materials.

The extent to which the energy levels of an active laser ion remain unaffected by the
host medium is determined principally by how well the ion’s optically active electrons
are shielded from the host’s neighboring lattice atoms. It will become clear that the
energy levels of transition-metal ions are substantially modified by the local field
effects of the host whereas those of lanthanide-metal (rare-earth) and actinide-metal
ions are scarcely affected. By way of example, we will consider the energy levels of
four well-known laser systems: 1) Cr?+:Al2O3 (ruby); 2) Cr?+:BeAl Oy (alexandrite);
3) Маз: УЗАБО12 (Nd°+:YAG); and 4) Nd?+: glass.

Transition-Metal lons
The most commonly encountered transition-metal ion dopants for lasers are the triva-
lent ions Ti?+ and Cr**, although some lasers make use of Cr?*, Cr4+, МР+, Co?*,
as well as other ions. The ground-state electron configurations and term symbols for
some of these ions, and for their respective elements, are presented in Table 14.1-1. It
is evident from the table that the optically active electrons for the transition-metal ions
reside in the 3d subshell.
Table 14.1-1 Selected transition-metal, lanthanide-metal (rare-earth), and actinide-metal ions used
in solid-state lasers. Ground-state electron configurations and term symbols for isolated atoms and
ions are provided.
о Ам В Ion В
Atomic Number Z Element Configuration® Term Ion Configuration® Term
Transition Metals
22 Ti 3d? 4s? 3Fy Tit 3d! 2Рз/2
cr2+ 3d‘ 5Do
24 Cr 3d° 481 79 crt 343 4 2
Crt 3d? р
26 Ее 348 482 5р. Fe?+ 348 5р.
Lanthanide Metals
60 Nd 4 f* 6s? Ty Nd3+ Af? {Tg 79
68 Er Af}? 682 3H, ЕгЗ+ ар 5/2
69 Tm 4 f!3 6s? Foy Tm?+ 4} ЗН
70 Yb 4} 6s? 150 Yb3+ 4fls "Fr yo
Actinide Metals
“By convention, the electron configurations for filled subshells are omitted; this includes those for the 582 5p®
filled subshells in the п = 5 shell of the lanthanides and those for the 6s” 6p° filled subshells in the n = 6 shell
of the actinides.
Ruby and alexandrite. We now proceed to examine the energy levels of two di-
electric media doped with Cr?+, namely ruby and alexandrite (Fig. 14.1-4). Ruby is
celebrated because it was the material from which the first laser was made (page 657),
whereas alexandrite received considerable early attention because its output is tunable

570 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
over a range of wavelengths. The energy levels of Ti:sapphire, perhaps the most im-
portant transition-ion laser material, will be considered in Sec. 16.3A.

Ruby (Cr?+:Al,03) is chromium aluminum oxide. It is a dielectric medium with
refractive index n = 1.76 that is composed principally of sapphire (Al2Os3, also called
aluminum oxide, alumina, and corundum), in which a small fraction of the АЗ ions
(= 0.05%) are replaced by Cr®* ions. Alexandrite (Cr?+:BeAl,0,) is formed by
doping a small amount of chromium oxide (= 0.1%) into a chrysoberyl (ВеА15 Ол)
host. This material has a refractive index that is close to that of ruby, n = 1.75; however
chrysoberyl is biaxial whereas sapphire is uniaxial.

Cr**: ALO, (Ruby) 4 Cr**: BeAL,O, (Alexandrite) 4

5 ° 2 & L  —1_4 — 2

tunable
laser
694-nm 1 680-nm 1
laser laser

“Ay iL 0 “Ay 0

Figure 14.1-4 Selected energy levels and energy bands for Cr?+:Al.O3 (ruby) and Cr3+ :BeAl,O4

(alexandrite). The red arrows represent laser transitions. Each laser emits light at a characteristic fixed

wavelength (694 nm for ruby and 680 nm for alexandrite). However alexandrite also lases over a range

of additional wavelengths. The dark-to-light shading of the lower laser band in alexandrite indicates

a decrease in relative occupancy. Because of the important role of the crystal field in determining the

energy levels of transition-metal ions in dielectric hosts, group-theoretical symbols, rather than term
symbols, are generally used to designate them.

Since the 3d electrons of the Cr+ ions in both materials are exposed to neigh-
boring ions, the energy levels of these materials are determined in large part by the
surrounding crystal fields and therefore depend substantially on the host material. In
particular, each chromium ion is surrounded by oxygen atoms in a configuration that
subjects it to a significant spatially varying potential. Best represented in the context
of crystal-field theory (or ligand-field theory), this potential, along with that of the
Cr?+ nucleus, determine the energy levels of ruby and alexandrite via the Schrédinger
equation. As a consequence, the energy levels of transition-metal ions in a dielectric
host are generally designated by group-theoretical symbols (e.g., 2Е and 4A) rather
than by term symbols.

The resultant energies are a mixture of discrete levels and energy bands, some of
which are shown in Fig. 14.1-4. The energy levels of the two materials are quite
distinct even though they share the same dopant ion. In particular, the “4y energy
band in alexandrite comprises a collection of vibronic states (shaded-blue region) that
result from coupling between the electronic energy levels and the lattice vibrations of
the crystal. Consequently, alexandrite is tunable over a (limited) range of wavelengths
whereas ruby is not (Sec. 15.3E). Nevertheless, alexandrite also lases at a characteristic
wavelength (680 nm) that is not too far from that of ruby (694 nm).

14.4 ENERGYLEVELS 571
Lanthanide-Metal lons
The lanthanide elements comprise the series from 5gCe to 7;Lu that reside in row 6
of the periodic table (Fig. 14.1-3). These elements, plus 2;Sc and 39Y, are often called
rare earths because they were long ago thought to be rare (they are in fact rarely rare).
The lanthanide elements are constructed by successively adding electrons to the 4f
subshell, which lies within the filled 5s?5p° and 6s? subshells, as shown in Table 14. 1-
1. The lanthanides usually exist as trivalent cations, in which case the configuration of
their valence electrons takes the form 4f", with u varying from 1 (Ce**) to 14 (13+).
The lanthanide ions №3+, Er?+, Tm?+, and Yb** are particularly important for
laser amplifiers and oscillators. The electron configurations and term symbols for these
trivalent ions, and their respective elements, are provided in Table 14.1-1. Nd**:glass
and Er?*:silica-glass fibers are widely used as laser amplifiers, as will be highlighted in
Secs. 15.3B and 15.3C, respectively. Nd?*:YVO,, Nd?+:YAG, and Yb?+:YAG often
serve as laser oscillators, as discussed in Sec. 16.3A. Among the other lanthanides,
Pr?+ and Ho** also find use as active laser ions. Two or more lanthanide ions are
frequently used to co-dope laser media in order to improve performance.
Ма?" :УАС and Nd®*:glass. The energy levels of trivalent lanthanide ions in a di-
electric host and in isolation are quite similar. This results from the fact that the op-
tically active 4f electrons are well shielded from the external effects of the lattice by
the filled 5s and 5p subshells (Table 14.1-1). This is in sharp contrast to the behavior
of transition-metal ions; unlike ruby and alexandrite, lanthanide-ion energy levels are
rather independent of the host material. This is illustrated in Fig. 14.1-5 for Nd?* in two
hosts that are quite different: YAG and phosphate glass. The main near-infrared laser-
transition wavelengths in the two materials, corresponding to the energy differences
between the *F3/2 and “7,1 /2 levels, are in close alignment: 1.064 jm for Nd*+:YAG
and 1.053 wm for Nd?*:glass.
3.0 3.0
Nd**: YAG Nd**: Glass
2.5 2.5
| ,
a a
2.0 2.0
> нии > ини
x2 es Ру 1.5 x2 as 4p 15
2 2
a 10 п 1.0
1.064-ит 1.053-ит
laser laser
0.5 0.5
{Tip | ‘Tin |
“Toy 0 “Topp 0
Figure 14.1-5 Selected energy levels of Nd?* in YAG and in phosphate glass. The arrows
indicate the principal near-infrared laser transition, which has a wavelength of 1.064 wm in YAG
and 1.053 jm in phosphate glass. The energy levels of both materials are rather similar at the scale
of this figure. Since the energy levels of the dopant ions are scarcely affected by the host, ionic term
symbols are used to designate them (Table 14.1-1). A magnified view of the manifolds for Nd?* :УАС,
provided in Fig. 14.1-6, shows the multiple sublevels.

572 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Lanthanide-ion manifolds. However, the energies of the sublevels within the
lanthanide-ion manifolds do depend on the host material. Nd°+:YAG and Nd**:glass
exhibit quite different sublevel structures because of differences in their local field
environments. Incorporating Nd** ions in a crystal such as YAG results in homo-
geneous broadening, whereas embedding them in a less structured material such
as phosphate glass results in inhomogeneous broadening (Sec. 14.3D). The sharp
Nd’: YAG sublevels are clearly visible in Fig. 14.1-6, which offers a greatly magnified
view of Fig. 14.1-5. For a glass host, these narrow sublevels are smeared into bands.
i 042 Г 034 1.50
” и ” Figure 14.1-6 Sublevels of the
~~ 0.10 0.32 148 three manifolds associated with
— Nd?+:YAG laser transitions near
0.08 —— _]l039 146 1.06 pm: (a) ground state “Торо;
> (b) lower laser level “L,1/2; (с) up-
4 0.06 0.28 144 per laser level *F3/2. The specific
5 energies of the sublevels depend оп
a 0.04 ——_lo6 — _}y 49 the host material; they are smeared
= into bands for hosts such as glass,
—__ м where inhomogeneous broadening
0.02 0.24 1.40 prevails.
0 0 0
(a) (b) ©
The number of distinct sublevels within each of the manifolds displayed in Fig. 14.1-
6 is determined by the value of g/2, where g = 2g + 1. Here g is the degeneracy
parameter and д is the total overall angular-momentum quantum number, which is
provided in the term symbol 75+'Ly, as discussed in Sec. 14.1A for atoms. For the
three Nd?+:YAG manifolds displayed in Fig. 14.1-6, the numbers of distinct sublevels
are (24 + 1)/2 = 5, 6, and 2, respectively. The celebrated 1.06415-jm laser line is
associated with a transition between the upper sublevel in the +P’ /2 manifold at 1.4269
eV and the third-from-bottom sublevel in the 4/,, j2 manifold at 0.2616 eV. (When
frequency doubled, this transition provides the well-known source of green light at
532 nm.)
Actinide-Metal lons
The actinide elements residing in row 7 of the periodic table (Fig. 14.1-3) are con-
structed by incrementing the number of electrons in the 5f subshell. The optically
active 5 } electrons in the actinide ions are shielded from the host lattice by the filled 6s
and 6p subshells (Table 14.1-1). The chemical behavior of the actinides is thus similar
to that of their lanthanide homologs. The 03+ ;СаЕ. laser, developed just months after
the ruby laser was demonstrated in 1960, operates on the 47,, /2 — “Ig/2 transition of
U*+ at Л, = 2.49 ит. Neodymium lies immediately above uranium in the periodic
table; both Nd*+ and 03+ share the same f* ground-state electron configuration and
4Ty /2 term symbol (Table 14.1-1). While the development of actinide-ion-doped laser
materials was impeded by their relative rarity and by the radioactive nature of many
of their isotopes, the advancement of lanthanide-ion-doped laser materials such as
Nd?* :CaF, proceeded apace. Nevertheless, U?+:CaF» was the first four-level laser ever
operated.
C. Molecules
Molecules can be formed by the combination of two or more atoms. A stable molecule
emerges when the sharing of valence electrons by the constituent atoms results in a

144 ENERGYLEVELS 573
reduction of the overall energy. Molecular bonds take several forms and differ widely
in their strengths. Two important forms of molecular bonding are covalent bonding
and ionic bonding. In the simplest view of the covalent bond, the negatively charged
electrons of the constituent atoms are simultaneously attracted by the positive charges
of two or more atoms. For the ionic bond, on the other hand, an electron is essentially
transferred from one constituent atom to another, resulting in an electrostatic attraction
between them. Weak residual bonding between molecules that arises neither from
covalent nor ionic bonding is known as van der Waals bonding. Such bonding often
arises from the interaction of molecular dipoles and may be attractive or repulsive.

Molecular energy levels are determined in part by the nature of the bonding and
the potential energies associated with the interatomic forces that bind the atoms. The
energy levels of a molecule are typically associated with three more-or-less distinct
features, whose transitions typically fall in different wavelength regions: rotational
transitions lie in the microwave and far infrared, vibrational transitions lie in the
infrared, and electronic transitions lie in the visible and ultraviolet. Since the time
scales of these features differ considerably, to first approximation they may be analyzed
separately. Molecules ranging from simple gases to dyes in a solvent serve as active
laser media (Sec. 16.3E).

Rotating Diatomic Molecule
The rotation of a diatomic molecule with moment of inertia J about its center of
mass can be considered as the rotation of a rigid rotor about an axis perpendicular
to its internuclear axis. The classical rotational energy for such a system is EF, =
[2 /29, where L is the angular momentum of the system about the axis of rotation. In
accordance with the laws of quantum mechanics, the square-magnitude of the angular
momentum of such a system is quantized according to L? = r(r + 1)h?, where r is
the rotational quantum number. The allowed energy levels of the rotating diatomic
molecule are thus
1 2

Е, = эле + Dh , r=0,1,2,.... (14.1-5)
The energy separations hw of rotational energy levels typically lie in the range between
10~* and 10~? eV, corresponding to photons in the microwave and far-infrared regions
of the spectrum. This energy spacing increases with increasing quantum number r, in
contrast to the spacing between successive electronic energy levels of hydrogen-like
atoms, which decrease with increasing quantum number in accordance with (14.1-4).
Vibrating Diatomic Molecule
The vibrations of a diatomic molecule (e.g., №, CO, HCl) are governed by an in-
tramolecular attraction and a restoring force that is approximately proportional to the
change in internuclear distance x. The system may therefore be modeled as two masses,
М! and Mo, joined by a spring, with reduced mass М, = M,M2/(M, + М2). А
molecular spring constant к can be defined such that the potential energy is V(x) =
ска. The molecular vibrations (e.g., for the № molecule portrayed in Fig. 14.1-7)
therefore take on the energy levels of a quantum-mechanical harmonic oscillator.

As discussed in Sec. 13.3, the levels are quantized in accordance with

Е, = (у+ 4)iw, у = 0,1,2,..., (14.1-6)
where w = \/к/М, is the (angular) oscillation frequency, $ hw is the zero-point
energy, and v is the vibrational quantum number. Equation (14.1-6) matches the
expression for the allowed energies of a mode of the electromagnetic field provided

574 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER

in (13.1-5). Typical values of fw for molecular vibrations lie in the range between 0.05
and 0.5 eV, corresponding to the mid-infrared region of the spectrum (as for the No
vibrational energy levels displayed in Fig. 14.1-7).

Unlike the energy levels of the hydrogen atom, and those of the rotating diatomic
molecule, the vibrational energy levels of the diatomic molecule are equally spaced. In
practice, however, the potential-energy curves for most molecules become anharmonic
as the energy increases (Sec. 22.7), which results in a diminution of the energy-level
separations as v increases. In the course of undergoing a vibrational transition, the
molecule may simultaneously alter its rotational state, whereupon both v and r change
in the vibrational—rotational spectrum.

eV к, со, eV
(050)
0.4 —— +04
(200)
— (040)
0.3 v=1 (001) 0.3
5 9.6-шт laser (030)
8 —
Я 02 10.6-ила laser (100) (020) 02
0.1 о
v=0 (000) (000) (000)
о Symmetric Asymmetric Symmetric Bending о
stretch stretch stretch
> = 22 = о |
©@—Ф© Ох © Geo EAC
Figure 14.1-7 Vibrational energy levels of the № and CO, molecules (the zero of energy is
arbitrarily set at v = 0). The allowed energy levels for the three modes of vibration of СО5,
antisymmetric stretch (A), symmetric stretch (S), and bending (B), are displayed schematically.
A triplet of quantum numbers (vgvgva) characterize the excitation of the modes. The transitions
indicated by red arrows represent laser emission at the iconic COz mid-infrared laser wavelengths
Ао = 10.6 wm and 9.6 ила, as indicated. A manifold of finely spaced rotational energy levels (not
shown) is associated with each vibrational level. The close energy match between the excited (v = 1)
Nz and (001) СО. energy levels, which is fortuitous, facilitates collisional excitation of the CO,
molecules in a gas-discharge tube.
Vibrating Triatomic Molecule
A triatomic molecule of particular interest in photonics is carbon dioxide, which serves
as a useful laser medium for generating high optical powers in the mid-infrared region.
Since it comprises three atoms and is linear, the CO2 molecule may undergo indepen-
dent vibrations of three kinds, as illustrated in Fig. 14.1-7: asymmetric stretch (A),
symmetric stretch (S), and bending (B). These normal modes exhibit the features of
quantum-mechanical harmonic oscillators, each with its own spring constant, value of
hw, and equally spaced energy levels. The expression for the energy of the molecule is
thus a sum of three terms, each of the form of (14.1-6), and the excitation of the system
is characterized by a triplet of vibrational quantum numbers: (vsv,v,). The transitions
indicated by the red arrows in Fig. 14.1-7 represent energy exchanges between normal
modes that lead to photon emission at the well-known CO, laser wavelengths near
Ло = 10.6 zm [(001) - (100)] and A, = 9.6 um [(001) — (020)] (Secs. 15.3E and
16.3G). As with diatomic molecules, each vibrational level is split into a manifold of
closely spaced rotational levels (not shown), whose energies are given approximately
by (14.1-5).

144 ENERGYLEVELS 575
Dye Molecule
Organic dyes are large and complex molecules. As a result, they may undergo joint
electronic, vibrational, and rotational transitions; they therefore have a vast array of
energy levels that comprise both singlet (S) and triplet (T) multiplicities. In the singlet
state, the spin of the excited electron is antiparallel to that of the remainder of the dye
molecule, whereas in the triplet state the spins are parallel. Energy-level differences
correspond to wavelengths covering broad swaths of the optical and ultraviolet regions.
Figure 14.1-8 portrays the structure of Rhodamine-6G, which becomes an ion when
dissolved in a solution of water or alcohol, along with an idealization of its energy-
level structure. This particular dye served as a welcome medium during the formative
years of laser development since it lased in the yellow region of the spectrum and could
be tuned over a reasonable wavelength range. The organic dye laser is briefly discussed
in Sec. 16.3E.
5
Dye es fra,
5 $1 3 "yy OU Gs eS
2 SS _,
Figure 14.1-8 Structure of the Rhodamine-
Laser 6G ion, which has the chemical formula
CogH31N2,07. The schematic at left illus-
1 trates a laser transition between two singlet
й manifolds with slightly different configura-
So —7 tions, as indicated by their horizontal offset.
Sat 0 Vibrational and rotational energy levels are
Singlet Triplet represented by thick and thin horizontal lines,
states states respectively.
D. Solids
The atoms (or molecules) of solids lie in close proximity to each other and typically
coalesce into a periodic arrangement comprising a crystal lattice. The strength of the
forces holding the atoms together is roughly of the same magnitude as the forces that
bind atoms into molecules. Consequently, the energy levels of solids are determined not
only by the potentials associated with individual atoms, but also by the potentials as-
sociated with neighboring lattice atoms. Though noncrystalline solids, such as glasses
and plastics, have orderly structures similar to those of crystals, they extend only over
a short range.

Four principal types of bonding occur in ordinary solids: ionic, covalent, metallic,
and molecular. Ionic solids (such as CaF.) comprise a crystalline array of positive
and negative ions held together by electrostatic attraction. Since there are no free
electrons to carry current, these materials are insulators. They are generally transparent
in the visible region of the spectrum since their bandgaps usually lie in the ultraviolet
(Fig. 5.5-1). Covalent solids, like covalently bound molecules, consist of atoms bound
by shared valence electrons. They are often insulators and can be transparent (such as

576 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
diamond) or opaque (such as graphite) in the visible region. Covalent solids can also
be semiconductors (such GaAs), which are opaque in the visible and transparent in
the infrared (Fig. 5.5-1). Metallic solids have delocalized valence electrons that are
shared by all of the positive ions, moving in their combined potential. The ability of
the electrons to wander through metallic crystals is responsible for their high electrical
conductivities. Metals strongly reflect light and are opaque in the visible. Molecular
solids (or van der Waals solids) contain small, non-polar covalent molecules held
together by van der Waals forces, which are far weaker than those involved in other
kinds of binding.
Energy bands. _ It is instructive to examine how the energy levels of an isolated atom
are modified as it comes into close contact with neighboring atoms in the course of
forming a crystal lattice. Isolated atoms and molecules (e.g., those in gases) exhibit
discrete energy levels (see Figs. 14.1-1, 14.1-2, 14.1-7, 14.1-8, for example). Each
individual atom in a collection of such identical isolated atoms has an identical set
of discrete energy levels. As these atoms are brought into proximity to form a solid,
exchange interactions (arising from the quantum-mechanical requirement of indis-
tinguishability for identical particles), along with the presence of fields of varying
strengths from neighboring atoms, become increasingly important. The initially sharp
energy levels associated with the valence electrons of isolated atoms gradually broaden
into collections of numerous densely spaced energy levels that form energy bands.
This process is illustrated in Fig. 14.1-9, where electron energy levels are illustrated
schematically for two isolated atoms (a); for a molecule containing two such atoms
(b); and for a rudimentary 1D lattice comprising five such atoms (c). The lowest-lying
energy levels remain sharp because the electrons in the inner subshells are shielded
from the influence of nearby atoms, but the initially sharp energy levels associated
with the outer atomic electrons become bands as the atoms enter into close proximity
and degeneracies are removed by Stark splitting.
Figure 14.1-9 Schematic energy levels
(0) у \ for: (a) two isolated atoms; (6) the same two
atoms after having been brought into close
contact and forming a diatomic molecule; and
(c) five identical atoms in close proximity
© С УУУУТУ having formed а rudimentary 1D crystal.
This picture is elaborated in Fig. 14.1-10, where we schematically compare the
energy levels of an isolated atom and three different kinds of solids that comprise
lattices of such atoms: a metal, a semiconductor, and an insulator. The lowest-lying
energy levels of these solids, denoted in this example by the electron configurations
13, 2s, and 2p, resemble those of the isolated atom because the inner electrons are
shielded from interatomic forces. In contrast, the discrete higher energy levels of the
atomic valence electrons, denoted 3s and 3p here, are split into densely packed energy
bands in the solids. The lowest-lying unoccupied, or partially occupied, energy band
is called the conduction band while the highest-lying fully occupied energy band is
known as the valence band. These two bands are separated by a forbidden band, with
an energy extent E, known as the bandgap energy. As with electrons in individual
atoms, the Pauli exclusion principle applies to the electrons in solids so that the lowest-
lying energy bands are occupied first.

144 ENERGYLEVELS 577
Vacuum level
| АА

Зр --- --- aa

35 --- --- ---

2p --- --- ---

8
5
2s --- --- ---
15 --= --- ---
Isolated Metal Semiconductor Insulator
atom

Figure 14.1-10 Broadening of the discrete energy levels of an isolated atom into energy bands
when atoms in close proximity form a solid. Fully occupied bands are darkly shaded, unoccupied
bands are lightly shaded, and partially occupied bands are both lightly and darkly shaded. The
forbidden band is shown as white. Typical values for the room-temperature conductivity o for
metals, semiconductors, and insulators are 108 (Q-m)~', 10~4-10° (Q-m)~', and 10—10 (Q-m)~?,
respectively.
Metals, semiconductors, and insulators. Metals comprise the greatest preponder-
ance of elements in the periodic table (Fig. 14.1-3). They have a partially occupied
conduction band at all temperatures (lightly and darkly shaded region in Fig. 14.1-10).
The availability of many unoccupied states in this band is responsible for their high
electrical conductivity (Sec. 8.2A). Semimetals, in contrast, have overlapping valence
and conduction bands.

Intrinsic semiconductors have an occupied valence band (dark shading in Fig. 14.1-
10) and an unoccupied conduction band (light shading) at Т = 0° К. Since there
are no available free states in the valence band, and no electrons in the conduction
band, the conductivity of an ideal intrinsic semiconductor at JT = 0° К is zero. As the
temperature of the semiconductor rises above absolute zero, however, an increasing
number of electrons from the valence band gain sufficient thermal energy to enter the
conduction band and thereby to contribute to the conductivity of the material.

Insulators also have a fully occupied valence band (dark shading in Fig. 14.1-10) and
an unoccupied conduction band (light shading). They are distinguished from semicon-
ductors by their larger bandgap energy, which is typically greater than about 3 eV. As
an example, the bandgap energy for silicon (a semiconductor) 15 Е’ ~ 1.1 eV whereas
that for diamond (an insulator) is Е, + 5.5 eV. Above absolute zero, fewer electrons
in insulators have the requisite thermal energy to surmount the bandgap energy and
contribute to the conductivity of the material. It should be pointed out, however, that
the degree of band overlap also plays a role in determining whether a material is a
metal, semiconductor, or insulator.

Semiconductors

Semiconductors find widespread use in photonics. They serve as sources such as light-
emitting diodes and laser diodes, waveguides, modulators, switches, and detectors, and
play many other important roles as well. We proceed to provide a brief introduction to
the energy levels of inorganic bulk semiconductors, quantum wells, quantum wires,
and quantum dots. A more extensive exposition relating to the properties of semicon-
ductors, including organic semiconductors, is provided in Sec. 17.1.

578 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Bulk semiconductors. The binary semiconductor GaAs was early on found to be
useful in photonics. This material takes the form of a zincblende structure comprising
two face-centered-cubic lattices, one of Ga atoms and the other of As atoms, displaced
from each other by 1/4 the length of a body diagonal (Fig. 14.1-11). Four molecules of
GaAs are present in the conventional cell, which is a cube. Each atom is surrounded by
four atoms of the opposite type, equally spaced and located at the corners of a regular
tetrahedron.
GaAs
; Е > © Са \ .
Conduction band р © As —\ >
Laser 142 У __ Зо CARS
Valence band | \ sap:
5
2 Figure 14.1-11 The semiconductor GaAs
a _ 10 takes the form of a zincblende crystal struc-
ture comprising two face-centered-cubic lat-
tices, one of Ga and the other of As. The
higher energy levels are closely spaced and
- 15 form bands. The zero of energy is (arbitrarily)
Ga _20 defined at the top edge of the valence band.
: Core levels _ 30 The GaAs laser diode operates on the elec-
. tron transition between the conduction and
— дз —-40 valence bands, in the near-infrared region of
: -50 the spectrum.

Semiconductors have many closely spaced allowed electron energy levels that take

the form of bands, as displayed in Fig. 14.1-11 for GaAs. The bandgap energy Ех,
which is the energy separating the valence and conduction bands, is 1.42 eV at room
temperature. The Ga and As (8d) core levels are quite sharp, as displayed in Fig. 14.1-
11. The valence band of GaAs is formed from the 4s and 4p levels (in analogy with the
schematic in Fig. 14.1-10).
Quantum wells. Crystal-growth techniques such as molecular-beam epitaxy and
vapor-phase epitaxy can be used to grow materials with specially designed band struc-
tures. In semiconductor quantum-well structures, the energy bandgap is engineered
to vary with position in a specified manner, leading to materials with unique electronic
and optical properties. An example is the multiquantum-well structure illustrated in
Fig. 14.1-12. This particular structure comprises ultrathin (2- to 15-nm-thick) layers of
GaAs alternating with thin (20-nm-thick) layers of AlGaAs. The bandgap of the GaAs
is smaller than that of the AlGaAs. For motion perpendicular to the layer, the allowed
energy levels for electrons in the conduction band, and for holes in the valence band,
are discrete and well separated, like those of the square-well potential in quantum
mechanics (Exercise 17.1-5); the lowest energy levels are shown schematically in each
of the quantum wells in Fig. 14.1-12.

The AlGaAs barrier regions can also be made ultrathin (< 1 nm), in which case the
electrons in adjacent wells can readily couple to each other via quantum-mechanical
tunneling, whereupon the discrete energy levels broaden into miniature bands called
minibands. The material is then called a superlattice structure because the associated

144 ENERGYLEVELS 579
lattice is “зирег to” (i.e., larger than) that of the atomic crystal lattice, which gives rise
to minibands rather than the natural full-size energy bands associated with the atomic
lattice. Quantum wells are discussed further in Secs. 17.1G, 18.2D, and 18.4A.

Conduction band
2
= GaAs AlGaAs
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Distance (nm)

Figure 14.1-12 Quantized energy levels in a single-crystal AlGaAs/GaAs multiquantum-well
structure. The well widths can be periodic or arbitrary (as shown).

Quantum wires. А semiconductor material that takes the form of a thin wire sur-
rounded by a material of wider bandgap is known as a quantum wire. The wire acts as
a potential well that narrowly confines electrons (and holes) in the two lateral directions
but not in the direction along the axis of the wire. Quantum wires are readily made from
Ш-У and II-VI semiconductors such as InP and CdSe, respectively; they usually have
rectangular or circular cross section. Nanotubes and nanowires fabricated from a broad
variety of materials can behave as quantum wires. Carbon nanotubes are cylindrical
carbon molecules with diameters of one or a few nm in which the carbon molecules
organize themselves into thin hollow ropes held together by van der Waals forces.
Single- or multiwalled nanotubes exhibit unique optical, mechanical, and electrical
properties. They can behave as semiconductors or highly conductive metals, depending
on the details of their structure. There are a multitude of uses for carbon nanotubes
in photonics, ranging from filaments for incandescent light sources to photovoltaic
detectors. Quantum wires are discussed further in Secs. 17.1G and 18.4B.

Quantum dots. Also known as nanocrystals or quantum boxes, quantum dots are
semiconductor particles whose dimensions typically fall in the range of 1 to 50 nm.
Quantum dots can be fabricated from many different kinds of semiconductors and
in many geometrical shapes (e.g., cubes, spheres, hemispheres, disks, and pyramids),
depending on the growth conditions. They are often embedded in semiconductor ma-
terials with larger bandgaps or in glasses or polymers. Robust techniques for growing
quantum dots continue to be developed. When fabricated using molecular-beam epi-
taxy (MBE) or chemical-vapor deposition (CVD), they can assume the form of disk-
shaped structures, in which the electron motion is restricted to a plane and is charac-
terized by 2D atomic-like shell structures not unlike those associated with the toroidal
resonators considered in Sec. 11.4B. Quantum dots can also be created via electron-
beam lithography; a pattern is etched onto a semiconductor chip and conducting metal
is deposited onto the pattern. Quantum dots can also be readily grown in a beaker using
wet chemistry. Self-assembled quantum dots, with typical dimensions in the range of
10-50 nm, are formed from colloidal nanocrystals provided in liquid suspension or
dispersed in a plastic composite. Chemical synthesis yields near-perfect crystalline
clusters that range from several hundred to several tens-of-thousands of atoms and as-
sume various shapes, again depending on the growth conditions. They can be deposited
onto substrates or incorporated directly into devices designed to accommodate them.
Self-assembly can also be achieved by means of epitaxial synthesis, which can yield

580 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
strained quantum-dot layers designed to improve device characteristics. Arrays and
self-assembled stacks of quantum dots are readily fabricated.

The sizes of quantum dots, and thus the number of atoms they contain, varies over a
broad range; а 10-nm cube of GaAs contains some 40 000 atoms. All electrons belong
to the dot as a whole; the number of electrons can be as small as just a few or as large
as millions. The energy levels of a quantum dot are those of its excitons, namely the
electron-hole pairs generated within, and confined to, the dot. As with atoms, a series
of sharp energy levels results from tight electron confinement; quantum dots are in fact
often called artificial atoms. Unlike atoms, however, a quantum dot fabricated from a
given material has the property that its energy levels are strongly dependent on its size.
Much as with the energy levels of an electron in a quantum well (Exercise 17.1-5),
tight confinement in a small quantum dot corresponds to large energy-level differences
and short transition wavelengths. The wavelength of an emitted photon consequently
decreases along with the size of the quantum dot. The color of light elicited from a
CdSe quantum dot by photoexcitation, for example, can be gradually tuned from the
red region of the spectrum for a 5-nm-diameter dot to the violet region for a 1.5-nm-
diameter dot; the trend is illustrated in Fig. 14.1-13. The photoexcitation wavelength is
arbitrary, as long as it is shorter than the emission wavelength. Quantum dots fabricated
from InP luminesce in the near infrared, whereas those fabricated from InAs emit
across the 1300-—1600-nm silica-fiber-based telecommunications band. Photoexcited
Si quantum dots also emit over a broad spectral range that extends from the infrared
to the visible (Example 17.2-2). Quantum dots can also be fabricated from organic
compounds.
ha Figure 14.1-13 Photoluminescence from

colloidal CdSe quantum dots (with oleylamine
surface capping molecules) dispersed in n-
hexane, in response to ultraviolet excitation at
Ао = 365 nm. Quantum-confinement effects
allow the emission color to be tuned with
quantum-dot size (courtesy Dong-Kyun Seo,
Arizona State University).

Quantum dots overcoated with a semiconductor material of higher-bandgap are
known as core-shell quantum dots, whereas those overcoated with multiple semi-
conductors of alternating higher and lower bandgaps are known as quantum-well—
quantum dots. Such overcoatings can substantially improve the tunability and photo-
luminescence efficiency of the nanostructure. Ordered arrangements of quantum dots,
known as quantum-dot solids, can be grown by a number of methods, including the
self-assembly of nanocrystals into a close-packed configuration. In the same way that
tunneling can occur in multiquantum-well superlattices, so too can it occur in quantum-
dot solids known as nanocrystal superlattices.

When quantum-dot structures are brought into contact with electrodes, they can
serve as miniature photonic devices. By constructing arrays of quantum dots of dif-
ferent sizes in specially designed configurations, they can sustain currents and operate
over broad, or specially chosen, wavelength ranges. Quantum dots are useful as spectral
tags in biological, commercial, and military applications. As discussed in Chapters 18
and 19, they also find use in a broad array of photonic devices such as light-emitting
diodes, semiconductor optical amplifiers, laser diodes, single-photon sources, memory
elements, photodetectors, solar cells, flat-panel displays, backlighting sources, and as
absorbers in materials where it is desirable to filter out ultraviolet light. Quantum dots
are discussed further in Secs. 17.1G and 18.4C.

14.2 OCCUPATION OF ENERGY LEVELS 581
14.2 OCCUPATION OF ENERGY LEVELS
As indicated earlier, each atom or molecule in a collection continuously undergoes ran-
dom transitions among its different energy levels. These transitions are characterized
by the rules of statistical physics. Temperature is the principal determinant of both the
average behavior and the fluctuations in energy-level occupancy.
A. Boltzmann Distribution
Consider a collection of distinguishable objects, such as atoms or molecules that form
a dilute gas. Each atom is in one of its allowed energy levels E,, E2,.... If the system
is in thermal equilibrium at temperature T' (i.e., if the atoms are kept in contact with
a thermal bath maintained at temperature Тапа their motion reaches a steady state in
which the fluctuations are, on average, invariant to time), the probability P(E,,,) that
an arbitrary atom is in energy level E,, is given by the Boltzmann distribution
P(Em) « exp(—Em/kT), т =1,2,3,..., (14.2-1)
where k is the Boltzmann constant. The coefficient of proportionality is chosen such
that 5°, P(Em) = 1. The occupation probability P(E,,,) vs. Е» is an exponentially
decreasing function of E,,,, as displayed in Fig. 14.2-1.
\
Е» ——————e Е \
\
\
—____. \
E E \
3 3 \
Е ——— Е, .
\
3
Е ————— E, NL
7
Energy levels Occupation РЕ»)
Figure 14.2-1 The Boltzmann distribution P(E,,), plotted on the abscissa, specifies the
probability that energy level Е», of an arbitrary atom is occupied; it is an exponentially decreasing
function of Еж.

The origin of Boltzmann distribution can be understood by considering a system
of many identical entities that share a fixed total energy E. The entities are isolated
from their surroundings but are in thermal equilibrium, exchanging energy among
themselves via а bath at temperature Т. The divisions of energy are taken to be dis-
tinguishable if they involve different energy states, and all possible divisions of the
total energy are assumed to occur with equal probability. If one of the entities takes
a large share of the total energy, less is available for the remaining constituents so
there are fewer possible divisions. Consequently, large energies are less probable than
small energies. A quantitative description is provided by considering two entities.
The probability of finding one with energy E, and the other with energy E 2 is the
product P(E,)P(E2) because they are independent. If the sum of the energies of the
two entities is fixed at the value FE, + E2, then P(E,)P(E2) must be a function of
(E; + Е2), which uniquely specifies an exponential function. The equipartition energy

582 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
kT for the two degrees of freedom associated with a harmonic mode leads directly to
the Boltzmann distribution.

Consider the Boltzmann distribution in the context of a large number of atoms №. If
Ny» is the number of atoms occupying energy level Еж, the fraction N,,/N = P(E).
If Ny atoms occupy level 1 and № atoms occupy a higher level 2, the population ratio
is, оп average,

№ Е — Е\1

— = ехр| ———— |. 14.2-2

м 5( кт ( )
This quantity depends оп the temperature Т. At T’ = 0° К, all atoms are in the lowest
energy level (ground state). As the temperature increases the populations of the higher
energy levels grow. Under equilibrium conditions, the average population of a given
energy level is always greater than that of a higher-lying level. This condition need
not hold under non-equilibrium conditions, however, in which case a higher energy
level can have a greater average population than a lower energy level. This latter
state of affairs, known as a population inversion, provides the basis for laser action
(Sec. 15.1A).

It was assumed in the foregoing that there is a unique way in which an atom can find
itself in one of its energy levels. It is sometimes the case, however, that two or more
states (e.g., different states of angular momentum) correspond to the same energy. To
account for such degenerate states, (14.2-2) can be written in the more general form

№ 82 Fo — Е\
— = = exp| ———— 14.2-3
м-в “ТР кт | ( )
where the degeneracy parameters gy and g, represent the numbers of states corre-
sponding to the energy levels Е and £1, respectively.
В. Fermi-—Dirac Distribution
Fermions subject to the Pauli exclusion principle, such as electrons with overlapping
wavefunctions in a multielectron atom or in a semiconductor, obey Fermi—Dirac statis-
tics. The probability of occupancy of a state of energy E is then described by the
Fermi-Dirac distribution (or Fermi function),
КЕ) = : (14.2-4)
~ exp [(E — Ey) /kT] +1? ,
where Ey is called the Fermi energy (Fig. 14.2-2).
E
Boltzmann Figure 14.2-2 The FermiDirac distribu-
Р(Е„) tion f(E), plotted on the abscissa, represents
— Jo the probability of occupancy of a state of
Е, ~~ energy Е. This distribution is applicable for a
system containing particles with overlapping
Fermi_Dirac wavefunctions in which the Pauli exclusion
principle applies. The Fermi—Dirac distribu-
«— (Е) tion is well approximated by the Boltzmann
distribution Р(Е») for Е >> Ey, where the
occupancy probability is low.
0 1/2 1

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 583
The occupancy probability decreases monotonically with increasing E, and falls
to a value of 1/2 at the Fermi energy Е = Ef. States for which f(E) = 1 are
definitely occupied. It is important to recognize that the Fermi—Dirac distribution f(E)
is a sequence of probabilities with values lying between 0 and 1 for all values of
Е, rather than a probability density function. However, for Е >> Er, the occupancy
probability is low and (14.2-4) reveals that the Fermi—Dirac distribution then reduces
to the Boltzmann probability distribution
P(E) х exp(—E/kT), (14.2-5)
as illustrated in Fig. 14.2-2. This condition is generally applicable for valence electrons
in the outer subshells of atoms and ions so that optically active electrons are populated
in accordance with the Boltzmann distribution. The Fermi function is considered in
more detail in Chapter 17.
Bosons such as photons (Sec. 13.2C) and atoms in a Bose-Einstein condensate
(Sec. 14.3F) obey the Bose-Einstein distribution.
14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS
A. Interaction of Single-Mode Light with an Atom
An atom may emit (create) or absorb (annihilate) a photon by undergoing a downward
or upward transition between pairs of its energy levels, while conserving energy in the
process. This section is devoted to describing the laws that govern such emissions and
absorptions. The interactions of photons with electrons and holes in semiconductors is
considered in Sec. 17.2.
Interaction Between an Atom and an Electromagnetic Mode
Consider the energy levels EF, and Е2 of an atom placed in an optical resonator of
volume V that can sustain a number of electromagnetic modes. We are particularly
interested in the interaction between the atom and the photons of a prescribed radiation
mode of frequency и = 1, where hyp = E2 — Ey, since photons of this energy
match the atomic energy-level difference. A formal study of such interactions relies on
quantum electrodynamics; we present the key results that emerge from such an analysis
below, without proof.
Three forms of interaction are possible — spontaneous emission, absorption, and
stimulated emission, which we consider in turn.
Spontaneous Emission
If the atom is initially in the upper energy level, it may decay spontaneously to the
lower energy level and release its energy in the form of a photon (Fig. 14.3-1). The
photon energy hy is added to the energy of the electromagnetic mode. The process is
called spontaneous emission because the transition is independent of the number of
photons that may already be in the mode.
2
h Figure 14.3-1 Spontaneous emission of a pho-
и : :
VAAN ton into the mode of frequency и by an atomic
transition from energy level 2 to energy level 1.
1 The photon energy hy = E2 — Ey.

584 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
In a cavity of volume V, the probability density (per second), or rate, for this
spontaneous transition depends оп v in a way that characterizes that atomic transition,
с
Pa =F a(v). (14.3-1)
Spontaneous Emission
into a Prescribed Mode
The quantity o(v), known as the transition cross section, is a function of и centered
about the atomic resonance frequency ш. The significance of this designation will
become apparent subsequently, but it is clear that о’ has dimensions of cm? (since the
dimensions of psp, с, and У are $1, cm/ $, and cm®, respectively). In principle, o(v)
can be determined from the Schrédinger equation but the calculations are generally
sufficiently complex that it is usually determined empirically. Equation (14.3-1) applies
separately to every mode, with a transition cross section o that depends on the angle
9 between the dipole moment of the atom and the field direction of the mode, in
accordance with
T = Omax COS” 0. (14.3-2)
The maximum cross section о’.„„„ 15 attained when the dipole moment and field align.
The term “probability density” signifies that the probability of an emission taking
place in an incremental time interval between $ and $ + At is simply р-р At. Because
it is a probability density, р-р can have a numerical value greater than 1 s~', although
of course р-р ДЕ must always be smaller than 1. Thus, if there are a large number №
of such atoms, a fraction of approximately AN = (ps) At) N atoms will undergo this
transition within the time interval At. Consequently, we can write dN/dt = —psp М,
indicating that the number of atoms N(t) = N(0) exp(—pspt) decays exponentially
with time constant 1 /р.р, as illustrated in Fig. 14.3-2.
NO
м0)
Figure 14.3-2 Spontaneous emission into
a single mode results in an exponential de-
crease of the number of excited atoms, with
time constant 1 /р.ь.
ao t
Psp
Absorption
If the atom is initially in the lower energy level and the radiation mode contains a
photon, the photon may be annihilated and the atom concomitantly raised to the upper
energy level (Fig. 14.3-3). This process, which is induced by the photon, is called
absorption. It can occur only when the mode contains a photon.
2 ——
hy Figure 14.3-3 Absorption is a process whereby
аллллллэ а photon of energy hy induces the atom to undergo
an upward transition from level 1 to level 2.
 —

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 585
The probability density for the absorption of a photon from a given mode of fre-
quency и, in a cavity of volume У, is governed by the same Jaw that governs sponta-
neous emission into that mode, namely
с
Dab = = O(V). (14.3-3)
у
However, if there are п photons in the mode, the probability density that the atom
absorbs one photon is п times greater since the events are mutually exclusive, 1.е.,
с
Pay = n=oa(v). (14.3-4)
У Absorption of One Photon
from a Mode with n Photons
Stimulated Emission
Finally, if the atom is in the upper energy level and the mode contains a photon,
the atom may be induced to emit another photon into the same mode. This process,
known as stimulated emission, is the inverse of absorption. The presence of a photon
in a mode of specified frequency, propagation direction, and polarization stimulates
the emission of a duplicate (“clone”) photon with precisely the same characteristics
as the original (Fig. 14.3-4). This photon amplification process is the phenomenon
that underlies the operation of laser amplifiers and lasers, as will be elucidated in
subsequent chapters.
2—
hv hv Figure 14.3-4 Stimulated emission is a process
AN wee whereby a photon of energy hv induces the atom
ARRAS to emit a clone photon as it undergoes a downward
1 transition from level 2 to level 1.
The probability density p,, that this process occurs in a cavity of volume У is
governed by the same law that governs spontaneous emission and absorption:
с
Pst = 7 O(V). (14.3-5)
If the mode originally carries n photons, the probability density that the atom is stim-
ulated to emit an additional photon is, just as in the case of absorption,
с
Py = nov). (14.3-6)
у Stimulated Emission of One
Photon into a Mode with n Photons
Under certain circumstances, as will be elucidated in Sec. 15.2B, the effective transi-
tion cross sections o(v) specified in (14.3-4) and (14.3-6) for absorption and stimulated
emission, respectively, differ; they are then denoted озь(и) and ош (и), respectively,
in which case P,, = Pap. When the two cross sections are equal, however, we use a
common notation for both probability densities: W; = Ps, = Pap.
Inasmuch as spontaneous emission is present in addition to stimulated emission,
combining (14.3-1) and (14.3-6) leads to an overall probability density of the atom
emitting a photon into the mode that is described by psy + Ps = (n+ 1)(c/V)a(v).

586 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER

From a quantum-electrodynamic point of view, spontaneous emission may be regarded
as stimulated emission induced by the zero-point fluctuations associated with the mode
(Sec. 13.1A). Because the zero-point energy plays no role in absorption, however, Pa,
is proportional to n rather than to (n + 1).

The three possible interactions between an atom and a radiation mode in a cavity
(spontaneous emission, absorption, and stimulated emission) obey the fundamental
relations set forth above. These formulas should be regarded as the rules that govern
the interactions between photons and atoms in the context of laser physics. They are to
be used in conjunction with the rules of photon optics set forth in Chapter 13. We now
proceed to discuss some of the consequences of these rather simple relations.
Lineshape Function and Transition Strength
It is clear from the foregoing that the transition cross section o(v) characterizes the in-
teraction of the atom with the radiation mode. Its shape governs the relative magnitude
of the interaction of the atom with photons over a range of frequencies, while its area,

oe)
S= ] a(v) dy, (14.3-7)
0

known as the transition strength or oscillator strength, represents the strength of the
interaction. The area 5, which has units of cm?-Hz, can be readily separated from the
shape (profile) of o(v) by defining a normalized lineshape function g(v) = o(v)/S,
which has unity area, to g(v) dv = 1, and units of Hz~!. The transition cross section

can then be written in terms of its strength and profile as
o(v) = Sg(v). (14.3-8)

The lineshape function g(v) is centered about the resonance frequency 1, where
o(v) is largest, and decreases sharply as и deviates from м. Transitions are therefore
most likely to occur for photons of frequency и = vo. The width of the function g(v)
is known as the transition linewidth Av, which is usually defined as the full-width
at half-maximum (FWHM) value of g(v) (Sec. A.2 of Appendix A). Since the area of
g(v) is unity, its width is inversely proportional to its central value,

Av < 1/9(0). (14.3-9)
It is also useful to define a peak cross section at the resonance frequency: оо = o(1).
As illustrated in Fig. 14.3-5, the transition cross section o(v) is then characterized by
four features: 1) its height об; 2) its width Av; 3) its area S; and 4) its profile g(v).
a(v) |
Av)
Av—| <—— с 0
Area =S — Ди
rea Area = 1
и и % и
Figure 14.3-5 = The transition cross section o(v) and the lineshape function g(v).

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 587
B. Spontaneous Emission
Total Spontaneous Emission into All Modes
Equation (14.3-1) provides the probability density p,, for spontaneous emission into a
prescribed mode of frequency и, without regard to whether the mode contains photons.
As indicated in (11.3-10), the density of modes for a three-dimensional cavity increases
quadratically with frequency as M(v) = 87v?/c?. This quantity approximates the
number of modes of frequency v, per unit volume of the cavity per unit bandwidth,
provided that the number of modes is sufficiently large so that a continuous approxima-
tion is suitable for counting the modes. An atom may spontaneously emit one photon
of frequency v into any of these modes, as shown schematically in Fig. 14.3-6.

————_@——__
| Алллллл-
Ают
Optical modes

Figure 14.3-6 Anatom may spontaneously emit a photon into any one (but only one) of the many
optical modes with frequencies и & мо.

The probability density for spontaneous emission into any available mode is there-
fore given by the probability density for spontaneous emission into a specific mode,
weighted by the modal density. Since modes at each frequency have an isotropic dis-
tribution of directions, each with two polarizations, we must make use of the average
transition cross section a(v). If 6 is the angle between the dipole moment of the atom
and the field direction, (14.3-2) provides

O(V) = $0 max (14.3-10)
since (cos?) = 1, where (-) represents an average in 3D space. The overall
spontaneous-emission probability density therefore becomes

Cc с ioe)
Ру = ] [Я a(v)| [VM(v)] dv = cf a(v) M(v) dv. (14.3-11)
0 0

Because the function o(v) is sharply peaked, it is narrow in comparison with the
quadratic function M(v) = 8rv?/c?. Since a(v) is centered about м, M(v) is approx-
imately constant with a value M(vo), and can thus be removed from the integral. The
probability density of spontaneous emission of one photon into any mode is therefore

— 8105 815
where Л = с/мо is the wavelength of the light in the medium and 5 = | (v) dv. We
define a time constant ¢;,, known as the spontaneous lifetime of the 2 — 1 transition,

588 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
such that 1/4.» = Psp, so
1
Py =—, (14.3-13)
tsp Spontaneous Emission of
One Photon into Any Mode
which is independent of the cavity volume У. Using this, (14.3-12) provides
_ 2
S=——, (14.3-14)
87 tsp
which enables the transition strength to be determined from an empirical measurement
of the spontaneous lifetime ¢,,. For a simple transition, such as between the first excited
state and the ground state of atomic hydrogen, we find that ts, = 10-8 s; however, tsp
can vary over a very broad range, from femtoseconds to seconds (see, e.g., Table 15.3-
1).

Equation (14.3-14) is useful because a first-principles calculation of S would require
intimate knowledge about the quantum-mechanical behavior of the system, which is
not always available.
НИ
EXERCISE 14.3-1
Frequency of Spontaneously Emitted Photons. Show that the probability density for an
excited atom spontaneously emitting a photon of frequency between и and и + dv is P,,(v) ах =
(1/tsp)g(v) dv. Explain why the spectrum of spontaneous emission from an atom is proportional to
its lineshape function g(v) after a large number of photons have been emitted.
ee
Relation Between Transition Cross Section and Spontaneous Lifetime
Using (14.3-14) together with the relation a(v) = Sg(v) shows that the average
transition cross section is related to the spontaneous lifetime and the lineshape function
via

2
a(v) = =—— g(v), (14.3-15)
871р Average Transition
Cross Section
a relationship known as the Fiichtbauer-Ladenburg equation. The average transition
cross section at the central frequency 1 is therefore
2
во = 9 (№) = ——— gl). 14.3-16
0 = O(%) = 900) (14.3-16)
Because 9(мо) is inversely proportional to Av, for a given value of t,, the peak transi-
tion cross section @ is inversely proportional to the linewidth Ди, in accordance with
(14.3-9).

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 589
C. Stimulated Emission and Absorption
Transitions Induced by Monochromatic Light
We now consider the interaction of single-mode light with an atom when a stream
of photons impinges on it, rather than when it resides in a resonator of volume V
as considered above. Let monochromatic light of frequency и, intensity Г, and mean
photon-flux density (photons/cm?-s)

@=I/hv (14.3-17)
interact with an atom whose resonance frequency is м. We wish to determine the
probability densities for stimulated emission and absorption, W; = Ps, = Pap, in this
configuration.

The number of photons n involved in the interaction process is determined by
constructing a volume in the form of a cylinder of base area A, height c x 1 s, and
volume У = cA. The axis of the cylinder is parallel to К, the direction of propagation
of the light. The photon flux that crosses the cylinder base is Ф = ФА (photons/s).
Because photons travel at the speed of light с, all of the photons within the volume of
the cylinder cross its base within one second. It follows that, at any time, the cylinder
contains п = ФА = ФУ/с photons so that

с

ф=т у. (14.3-18)
To determine W;, we substitute (14.3-18) into (14.3-4) ог (14.3-6) to obtain
It is apparent that o(v) is the coefficient of proportionality between the probability
density of an induced transition and the photon-flux density. This relationship informs
us that the appellation “transition cross section” is apt: @ is the photon-flux density
(cm~?-s~') while o(v) is the effective cross-sectional area of the atom (cm), so that
¢a(v) represents the probability density (s~') that a photon in the stream is “captured”
by the “cross section” of the atom for the purpose of stimulated emission or absorption.

It is clear from (14.3-4), (14.3-6), and (14.3-11) that the probability densities for ab-
sorption, stimulated emission, and spontaneous emission are all proportional to o(v).
As discussed above, stimulated emission involves decay only into those modes that
contain photons. Though the expression for @(v’) set forth in (14.3-15) was obtained
for spontaneous emission into multiple modes, it is convenient to make use of it in
conjunction with (14.3-19) to determine the probability density for induced transitions
as well, since фр is readily determined experimentally.

The use of the quantity o(v) instead of o(v) in (14.3-15) is a result of averaging over
the angle between the dipole moment of the atom and the field direction [see (14.3-2)
and (14.3-10)]; it is appropriate for spontaneous emission into all modes. However,
when such averaging is not called for, such as in the case of stimulated emission into a
particular mode and a fixed angle 0, с(и) and оо are used in place of 7(v) and Gp. Any
required change in o(v) associated with averaging for a particular induced-transition
configuration can be readily accommodated by modifying ¢,,, which is then referred
to as the effective spontaneous lifetime. For simplicity, we shall henceforth not dis-
tinguish between t;, for spontaneous emission and its effective value for stimulated
emission.

590 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Transitions Induced by Broadband Light
Consider now an atom in a cavity of volume V containing multimode polychromatic
light of spectral energy density о(и) (energy per unit bandwidth per unit volume) that is
broadband in comparison with the atomic linewidth. The average number of photons in
the frequency band from и to и + dv is [o(v)V/hv] dv; each of these has a probability
density (c/V)a(v) of initiating an atomic transition. As with spontaneous emission,
the modes at each frequency are taken to be isotropically distributed in direction,
each with two polarizations, so that the overall probability of absorption or stimulated
emission is
CO
ov)V fe _
ии = ] ву E a(v)| dv. (14.3-20)
Since the radiation is broadband, the function о(и) varies slowly in comparison with
the sharply peaked transition cross section a(v). We can therefore replace o(v) /hv
under the integral with e(v) /hvo, which leads to
Co
W; = o(v) of a(v) dv = 9%) 5, (14.3-21)
hv 0 hv
Using (14.3-14), we therefore have
W; = ——— 14.3-22
a тр o(Y), ( )
where Л = c/Vp is the wavelength in the medium at the central frequency хо. Defining
3
n= — 14.3-23
which represents the mean number of photons per mode, allows us to write (14.3-22)
in the convenient form
The interpretation of 7 as the mean number of photons per mode follows from the
form of the ratio [see (14.3-12), (14.3-21), and (14.3-22)]
и _ № 1
Wi _ Хо) 1 _ 9. (14.3-25)
Psp 8thtsp M(v)cS hyp M(v)
the quantity 0(vo) /hvp represents the mean number of photons per unit volume in the
vicinity of the frequency хо while M(vo) is the number of modes per unit volume in
the vicinity of м. The probability density W; is thus a factor of 7 greater than that for
spontaneous emission, since each mode contains an average of и photons.
Einstein A and B Coefficients
Though Einstein did not have knowledge of (14.3-22), in 1917 he carried out an
important analysis of the energy exchange between atoms and radiation that permitted
him to obtain general expressions for the probability densities of spontaneous and
stimulated transitions. He assumed that the atoms interacted with broadband radiation

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 591
of spectral energy density o(v), under conditions of thermal equilibrium, and obtained
the following expressions:

Ру» =A (14.3-26)
W; = Bo(vo). (14.3-27)
Einstein’s Postulates
The constants A and B are known as the Einstein A and B coefficients.
Comparison with (14.3-13) and (14.3-22) reveals that the A and B coefficients
correspond to
1
А = — (14.3-28)
tsp
ХЗ
B= ——_, 14.3-29
8 р ( )
which are associated with spontaneous and stimulated transitions, respectively. The
ratio is given by
B d3
— = —. 14.3-30
А 87h ( )
The relation between the A and B coefficients is a result of the microscopic (rather than
macroscopic) probability laws of interaction between an atom and the photons of each
mode. We shall present an analysis similar to that provided by Einstein in Sec. 14.4.
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 14.3-1. Comparison Between Rates of Spontaneous and Stimulated
Emission. Whereas the rate of spontaneous emission for an atom in the upper state is constant at
A = 1/tsp, the rate of stimulated emission in the presence of broadband light, Ba(v), is proportional
to the spectral energy density of the light, о(шо). The two rates are equal when o(1)) = А/В =
8rh/X*; for larger values of the spectral energy density, the rate of stimulated emission exceeds
that of spontaneous emission. ИЛ = 1 pm, for example, А/В = 1.66 x 10~! J/m*-Hz. This
corresponds to an intensity spectral density co(vy) = 5 x 10-6 W/ m’-Hz in free space. Thus, for
a linewidth Av = 107 Hz, the optical intensity at which the stimulated emission rate equals the
spontaneous emission rate is 50 W/m” or 5 mW/cm’.
Summary
An atomic transition may be considered in terms of its resonance frequency № =
(E2 — E,)/h, spontaneous lifetime t,,, and lineshape function 9(и), which has
linewidth Av. The average transition cross section is
— А?
a(v) = Sg(v) = —— g(v). (14.3-15)
87 tsp

592 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Spontaneous Emission
= If the atom is in the upper level and in a cavity of volume V, the probability
density (per second) of emitting spontaneously into one prescribed mode of
frequency v is
с
Psa = ту o(v). (14.3-1)
= The probability density of spontaneous emission into any of the available
modes is
815 1
Вр = == = —. 14.3-13
= The probability density of emitting into modes lying only in the frequency
band between и and и + dv is P;, dv = (1/tsp)g(v) dv.
Stimulated Emission and Absorption
= If the atom in the cavity is in the upper level and a radiation mode contains
n photons of frequency v, the probability density of emitting a photon into
that mode is
W; =n т o(v). (14.3-6)
If the atom is instead in the lower level, and а mode contains n photons, the
probability density of absorption of a photon from that mode is also given
by (14.3-6).
= If instead of being in a cavity, the atom is illuminated by a monochromatic
beam of light of frequency v, with mean photon-flux density ¢ (photons per
second per unit area), the probability density of stimulated emission (if the
atom is in the upper level) or absorption (if the atom is in the lower level) is
И/; = gov). (14.3-19)
= If the light illuminating the atom is polychromatic, but narrowband in com-
parison with the atomic linewidth, and has a mean spectral photon-flux den-
sity @, (photons per second per unit area per unit frequency), the probability
density of stimulated emission/absorption is
W; = fd, o(v) dv. (14.3-31)
= If the light illuminating the atom has a spectral energy density о(и) that is
broadband in comparison with the atomic linewidth, the probability density
of stimulated emission /absorption is
where В = \3/87ht,, is the Einstein В coefficient.
In all of these formulas, с = со/п is the velocity of light and Л = X,/n is the
wavelength of light in the atomic medium, and n is the refractive index.

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 593
D. Line Broadening
Because the lineshape function g(v) plays an important role in atom—photon inter-
actions, we provide in a brief discussion of some of the mechanisms that lead to line
broadening. The same lineshape function applies for spontaneous emission, absorption,
and stimulated emission.
Lifetime Broadening
Atoms can undergo transitions between energy levels by both radiative and nonradia-
tive means. Radiative transitions are associated with photon absorption and emission,
whereas nonradiative transitions permit energy transfer to take place via mechanisms
such as lattice vibrations, inelastic collisions among the constituent atoms, and inelastic
collisions with the walls of the vessel. Each atomic energy level has a lifetime 7, which
is the inverse of the rate at which its population decays, radiatively or nonradiatively,
to all lower levels.

The lifetime то of energy level 2 shown in Fig. 14.3-1, for example, represents the
inverse of the rate at which the population of that level decays to level 1 and to all
other lower energy levels (none of which are shown in the figure), by either radiative
or nonradiative means. Since 1/ tsp is the radiative decay rate from level 2 to level 1,
the overall decay rate 1/72 must be greater, 1.е., 1/72 > 1/tsp, thus corresponding to
a shorter decay time, то < tsp. The lifetime ти of level 1 is defined similarly. Clearly,
if level 1 is the lowest allowed energy level (the ground state), then it will never decay
and ти = со.

Lifetime broadening is, in essence, a Fourier transform effect. The lifetime 7 of
an energy level is related to the time uncertainty of the occupation of that level. As
shown in Sec. A.1 of Appendix A, the Fourier transform of an exponentially decaying
harmonic field e~‘/?7e/?7”0', which has an energy that decays as е УТ with time
constant т, is proportional to 1/[1 + j47(v — vo)r]. The full-width at half-maximum
(FWHM) of the absolute square of this Lorentzian function of frequency is Av =
1/27. This spectral uncertainty corresponds to an energy uncertainty AE = hAv =
й/2пт. We conclude that a lifetime-broadened energy level with lifetime т has an
energy spread AE = h/2z7, provided that the decay process can be modeled as
a simple exponential. In this picture, spontaneous emission can be viewed in terms
of a damped harmonic oscillator that generates an exponentially decaying harmonic
function, as embodied in the Lorentz oscillator model presented in Sec. 5.5C.

Hence, if the energy spreads of levels 1 and 2 are AE, = h/2a7, and AE2 =
h/2m72, respectively, the spread in the energy difference corresponding to the transi-
tion between the two levels is

ДЕ = AE, + AEg = fe (<++) = al (14.3-32)
27 \п 12 2п т
where т is the transition lifetime and 7~! = (тр ty То. '), The corresponding spread of
the transition frequency, which is called the lifetime-broadening linewidth, is therefore
Av = + Е + =) . (14.3-33)
2m \T1 т Lifetime-Broadening
Linewidth
This spread is centered about the frequency м = (E2 — E,)/h, and the lineshape

594 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
function has a Lorentzian profile:
Av /2r
gv) = er . (14.3-34)
(v — м)? + (Av/2) Lorentzian
Lineshape Function
More generally, the lifetime broadening associated with an atom or a collection
of atoms may be modeled in the following manner. Each of the photons emitted in
the course of a transition is represented by a wavepacket of central frequency мо (the
transition resonance frequency), with an exponentially decaying field envelope with
decay time 27, which corresponds to an energy decay time equal to the transition
lifetime 7. As illustrated in Fig. 14.3-7, the radiated light is taken to be a sequence
of such wavepackets emitted at random times. As discussed in Example 12.1-1, this
corresponds to random (partially coherent) light with a spectral intensity that is de-
scribed precisely by the Lorentzian function given in (14.3-34), with Av = 1/2лт.
gv)
— 2т kK
lu vl | И Ц | № | Ц | | | М Maen >] \—^
qi" eee yy iL i
0 и и
Figure 14.3-7 Wavepacket emissions at random times from а lifetime-broadened atomic system
with transition lifetime т. The light emitted has a Lorentzian spectral intensity of width Ди = 1/277.
The value of the Lorentzian lineshape function at the central frequency № is
g(vo) = 2/тДи, (14.3-35)
so that the peak transition cross section, given Бу (14.3-16), becomes
№ 1
a) = — ——_. 14.3-36
°0 21 2WtspAv ( )
The largest transition cross section occurs under ideal conditions when the decay is
entirely radiative so that Tt; = ts, and 1/7; = 0 (which is the case when level 1
is the ground state from which no decay is possible). From (14.3-33), we then have
Av = 1/2 %», whereupon
бо = A7/27, (14.3-37)
indicating that the peak cross section is of the order of one square wavelength. When
level 1 is not the ground state, or when nonradiative transitions are significant, we
have Ди >> 1/2rts, in which case бо can be significantly smaller than \?/27. For
example, for optical transitions in the range А = 0.1 to 10 ym, values of \?/27 lie
between 1071! and 10-7 cm?, whereas observed values of оо generally fall in the
range between 10-20 and 10"? cm? (see, e.g., Table 15.3-1).

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 595
Collision Broadening
Collisions in which energy is exchanged, called inelastic collisions, result in transitions
between atomic energy levels. This affects the decay rates and lifetimes of all levels
involved and modifies the linewidth of the radiated field considered above.

Collisions that do not involve an exchange of energy, called elastic collisions, also
modify the linewidth of the radiated field, but in a different way. An elastic collision
imparts a random phase shift to the wavefunction associated with the energy level,
which in turn results in a random phase shift of the radiated field at each collision time.
As illustrated in Fig. 14.3-8, a sine wave whose phase is modified by a random shift at
random times (the collision times) exhibits spectral broadening. The spectrum of such
arandomly dephased function can be determined by appealing to the theory of random
processes. The result turns out to again be Lorentzian, with a width Av = froi/7,
where Гео is the collision rate (mean number of collisions per second). Both lifetime
and collision broadening are therefore accommodated by a Lorentzian lineshape func-
tion with an overall linewidth that is the sum of the individual linewidths:

27 \T%1 т
F VV POV VVTLUV TY *
Collision times ;
1

Figure 14.3-8 A sine wave interrupted at the rate хо! by random phase jumps has a Lorentzian
spectrum of width Ди = fioi/7.

Inhomogeneous Broadening

Lifetime and collision broadening are examples of homogeneous broadening mecha-
nisms in which the interacting atoms of a medium are all taken to be identical, with the
same lineshape functions and center frequencies. For some media, however, different
subsets of interacting atoms exhibit different behavior, either because of differences in
the local environment or because of their dynamical behavior. The distinction is high-
lighted by examining the sublevels in the Nd** -ion manifolds discussed in Sec. 14.1B.
Incorporating Nd** in a crystal such as YAG, which gives rise to homogeneous broad-
ening, leads to energy sublevels that are distinct and narrow (Fig. 14.1-6). In contrast,
these sublevels are smeared into bands when Nd*+ is embedded in a less structured
material such as glass, which gives rise to inhomogeneous broadening. The origin of
the distinction in this case is the random value of the electric field at different locations
in the glass, which imparts position-dependent Stark shifts to the energy levels of the
embedded Nd** ions that results in broadening. Analogously, different subsets of the
excited active ions in the Ar*-ion gas laser travel at different velocities and in different
directions, resulting in a distribution of the lineshape-function center frequencies by
virtue of the Doppler effect.

For inhomogeneously broadened media, we can define an average lineshape func-
tion

av) = (galv)). (14.3-39)

596 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
where (-) represents an average with respect to the variable В, which labels the subset
of atoms with lineshape function gg(v). The average lineshape function is obtained by
weighting the gg(v), which are known as spectral packets, by the fraction of the atomic
population endowed with the property р, as pictured in Fig. 14.3-9.
9 | | wan Figure 14.3-9 The average lineshape
" function for an inhomogeneously broadened
collection of atoms.
% и
А commonly encountered inhomogeneous broadening mechanism is Doppler
broadening. As a result of the Doppler effect, an atom moving with velocity v along a
given direction exhibits a lineshape function that is shifted by the frequency +(v/c)vp
when viewed along that direction, where мо is its central frequency. The shift is in
the direction of higher frequency (+ sign) if the atom is moving toward the observer,
and in the direction of lower frequency (— sign) if it is moving away. For an arbitrary
direction of observation, the frequency shift is +(v,/c)vo, where v, is the component
of velocity parallel to the direction of observation. Since a collection of atoms in a
gas exhibits a distribution of velocities, as depicted in Fig. 14.3-10, the light they emit
exhibits a range of frequencies that is known as Doppler broadening.
<—Direction _ Figure 14.3-10 The frequency radiated
5 of observation by an atom depends on the direction of
<r atomic motion relative to the direction of
bon observation. Radiation from atom 1 has а
3 1 higher frequency than that from atoms 3 and 4
4 enn since the atom is moving toward the observer.
Radiation from atom 2 has a lower frequency
since it is moving away from the observer.
For Doppler broadening, the velocity у therefore plays the role of the parameter В
and 9(и) = (9,(,)). As illustrated in Fig. 14.3-11, if p(v) dv is the probability that
the velocity of a given atom lies between v and v + dv, the overall inhomogeneous
Doppler-broadened lineshape function is
© у
7(v) = ] a(v — и“ ) p(v) dv. (14.3-40)
о с
их
И.
/ S— a)
/ РМ) и f
и № 9(и-иу)
0 Velocity v 0 “ и - и
Figure 14.3-11 Velocity distribution and construction of the average lineshape function for а
Doppler-broadened atomic system.

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 597
ee
EXERCISE 14.3-2
Doppler-Broadened Lineshape Function.

(a) A collection of atoms in a gas has a component of velocity v along a particular direction that
obeys the Gaussian probability density function
(Ее ( =) (14.3-41)
v) = —=— exp| -=> .3-
р О, Р\-5= }
where о? = КТ/М and М is the atomic mass. If each atom has а Lorentzian natural lineshape
function of width Av and central frequency мо, derive an expression for the average lineshape
function 9 (v).
(b) Show that if Av < мод, /с, 9 (и) may be approximated by the Gaussian lineshape function
_ 1 (v- aa
v) = ——— вер |, 14.3-42
9) = EG, 2] 208 mee)
where
0 1 /kT
=nHy~=<\/—. 14.3-43
Op Yo с х M ( )
The full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) Doppler linewidth Avp is then
Avp = V8In2 op == 2.35 op. (14.3-44)
(с) Compute the Doppler linewidth Avp for the Л, = 632.8-nm laser transition in Ne and compare
it with that for the A, = 10.6-ym laser transition in CO2, assuming that Av «< voo,/c and
T = 300° К. The relative atomic mass for Ne is А, = 20, the analogous quantity for СО. is
А 12 + 16 + 16 = 44, and the proton mass m, = 1.67 x 10-77 kg.
(d) Show that the maximum value of the transition cross section for the Gaussian lineshape function
in (14.3-42) is
А 1
= | —— а А 0.94 — —_—_. 14.3-45
70 (= tsp ) 9 (v0) 87 tsp Avp ( )
Compare this with (14.3-36) for the Lorentzian lineshape function.
НИ
Some atom—photon interactions exhibit broadening that is intermediate between
pure homogeneous and pure inhomogeneous. Such mixed broadening can be modeled
by an intermediate lineshape function such as the Voigt profile.
*E. Enhanced Spontaneous Emission
All of the results presented thus far in Sec. 14.3 are predicated on the assumption that
Av > др, 1.е., that the atomic linewidth Av is far greater than the width of an electro-
magnetic mode ди. This condition is usually, but not always, obeyed. In the opposite
limit, when the atomic linewidth is far smaller than the width of an electromagnetic
mode (Fig. 14.3-12), an enhancement of the spontaneous emission probability density
can be achieved, particularly in high-Q microcavities, as we proceed to demonstrate.
The enhancement of spontaneous emission is desirable for the operation of certain
microcavity sources, as discussed in Sec. 18.5.

598 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
pv)
2 Q _ Vy
ти, — ov = . ._.
Q Figure 14.3-12 Spontaneous emission
from an atom with normalized lineshape
и и function g(v) into a broader normalized
Lorentzian cavity mode p(v). The lineshape-
9%) function and cavity-mode center frequencies
are designated by vo and vz, respectively,
—|- Av while their widths are specified by Av and
би. We consider the case where мо = и. and
VY 7 Ди < ди.

Consider the spontaneous emission of ап atom with resonance frequency 1 into
an electromagnetic mode with center frequency и, = vo in the regime Ди < dv, as
portrayed in Fig. 14.3-12. In accordance with (14.3-11), when the dipole moment of
the atom is aligned with the field direction of the mode, the probability density for
spontaneous emission into a single cavity mode p(v) is given by

pues |< (vol) av x & gy › [awa (14.3-46)
= = Omax(Y) p(v) dv = = —— p(y и) dy, 3-
> if А р V 8rty ИД 9
SINCE о’„„„(и) = 30(v) and a(v) = А? g(v) /87tsp, as provided in (14.3-10) and (14.3-
15), respectively. Inasmuch as the lineshape function g(v) is normalized, and the height
of the normalized Lorentzian lineshape function of the cavity mode is 2Q/mv,, where
Q = v,/dv, we obtain
1 3cd? 2 1 3 №
px — 1 3A 2 _ 1 3 Xe (14.3-47)
tsp ЗПУ ли р 407 И
The net result is an enhancement of the spontaneous emission probability density
relative to that in free space by a quantity known as the Purcell factor:
pmax 3 ХЗ
Fp = —* = 3 @. (14.3-48)
Psp An’ У Purcell Factor
The Purcell factor in (14.3-48) exhibits the following features:

= The factor of 3 is a result of the alignment of the dipole moment of the atom and

the field direction of the mode.

= The quantity \°/V, which is the ratio of the cubed wavelength to the cavity

volume, is substantially enhanced in a microcavity.

= A high value of С), i.e., a sharp cavity mode, enhances the Purcell factor; however,

as ©) increases, dv = v,/( decreases, so that ultimately the condition Av < ди
is violated.
Finally, we note that as vp deviates from v,, the height of the cavity mode at о
becomes smaller and the enhancement of spontaneous emission ultimately becomes
a suppression of spontaneous emission.

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 599
*F. Laser Cooling, Laser Trapping, and Atom Optics

The forces exerted by light on material media (Sec. 13.1D) can be used to reduce the
velocity spread of a low-density collection of neutral atoms or ions (laser cooling)
and to confine them to a reduced volume of space (laser trapping). Atomic beams,
and atoms confined to traps, are used in atom optics and atom interferometry to
carry out highly precise measurements. Cooled and trapped atoms in the form of Возе-
Einstein condensates, along with trapped Fermi gases, offer fundamental insights into
the quantum nature of matter.
Laser Cooling
A number of schemes exist for the laser cooling of ions and neutral atoms. Some make
use of the external degrees of freedom of the atom, such as its position and momentum,
while others rely on the dynamical interplay between its external and internal degrees
of freedom, such as its electronic configuration and spin. Both absorptive (scattering)
and dispersive (gradient or dipole) forces can play a role. Laser cooling has also been
extended beyond neutral atoms toward more complex systems such as molecules and
small macroscopic objects. Applications of laser cooling include precision metrology,
high-resolution spectroscopy, and quantum science.

Doppler cooling. One of the simplest laser-cooling schemes, known as Doppler
cooling, relies on a beam of atoms moving toward a narrow-linewidth laser beam
whose center frequency is tuned slightly below the atomic line center. Following pho-
ton absorption by the subset of atoms whose Doppler-shifted frequency matches the
photon frequency, an atom can return to the ground state via either stimulated emission
or spontaneous emission. If it returns by stimulated emission, the momentum of the
emitted photon is the same as that of the absorbed photon, leaving the atom with no
net change of momentum. If it returns by spontaneous emission, on the other hand, the
direction of the photon emission is random so that repeated absorptions and emissions
result in a net decrease of the atom’s momentum in the direction pointing toward the
laser beam. The result of this absorptive effect is a decrease in the velocity of that
subset of atoms, as shown schematically in Fig. 14.3-13. Other subsets of atoms can
be cooled by changing the laser frequency or by using alternative techniques such as
a broadband laser or an inhomogeneous magnetic field that modifies the atomic-line
center frequency (a “Zeeman slower’).

Figure 14.3-13 Velocity distribution of a
a beam of Na atoms (dotted curve). A laser
Е beam of fixed frequency serves to transfer
& atoms in a narrow velocity range to an
2. even narrower velocity range centered at а
Bo lower velocity, thereby Doppler cooling the
5 _ atomic beam (solid curve). (Adapted from
A a — — W. D. Phillips, Laser Cooling and Trapping of
2” = Neutral Atoms, Reviews of Modern Physics,

Velocity (m/s) the American Physical Society.)

Optical molasses. When three pairs of orthogonally oriented, counterpropagat-
ing laser beams are used for 3D Doppler cooling a collection of atoms, each atom
encounters a velocity-dependent viscous-damping force regardless of the direction in
which it moves. The laser beams are said to behave like optical molasses since they
strongly resists the velocity spread of the atoms, though there is no restoring force to

600 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
push the atoms to the center of the apparatus. The calculated Doppler-cooling limit for
an idealized two-level system is in the vicinity of several hundred pK.

Sisyphus cooling. Doppler cooling is widely used but other approaches allow
atoms and ions to be cooled to temperatures orders of magnitude below the Doppler-
cooling limit. Atoms can undergo polarization gradient cooling or Sisyphus cooling
by making use of a set of orthogonal, linearly polarized, counterpropagating laser
beams that produce a standing wave whose polarization varies on a subwavelength
scale. Atoms in such a standing wave experience a combination of a position-dependent
AC Stark shift (light shift), a gradient or dipole force, and optical pumping that allow
the temperature to be reduced to the single-photon recoil limit associated with the
atomic emission of a single photon (Exercise 13.1-2). Temperatures in the few иК
regime, well below the Doppler-cooling limit, are obtained.

Evaporative cooling. It is also possible to reduce temperatures below the single-
photon recoil limit. One approach for doing so, known as evaporative cooling, op-
erates by gradually reducing the trap depth so that atoms with energies exceeding
this depth escape, leaving behind less energetic atoms. A reduced temperature results
when thermal equilibrium is reestablished by subsequent collisions. Another subrecoil
cooling technique can be implemented by making use of velocity-sensitive coherent
population trapping. Physical insight into this process can be obtained by considering
the velocity of the atom in terms of a random walk that obeys Lévy statistics. Careful
design of sub-recoil cooling configurations allows temperatures to be reduced to a few
nK, corresponding to atomic velocities smaller than cm/s. Cooling to tens of pK has
been achieved in gravity-free environments.

Laser Trapping

Laser trapping, often combined with laser cooling, can be used to confine, manipulate,
and study ions, neutral atoms, molecules, dielectric particles, biological cells, and small
macroscopic objects. Laser trapping and cooling is useful in quantum and nonlinear
optics; a single atom and a single photon can be trapped together to implement cavity
quantum electrodynamics in its most elemental configuration. It also allows light to
be shed on the physics of cold-atom collisions and microfluidics and enables Bose—
Einstein condensates and atom lasers to be created.

Optical tweezers. Optical tweezers are widely used for confining and manip-
ulating particles that range in size from single atoms to small biological structures.
Developed in the 1980s and originally called a “single-beam gradient force trap,”
they can be used in zero, one, two, or three dimensions. Optical tweezers make use
of focused laser beams to physically contain samples via scattering and gradient forces
at levels that extend from fN to pN. The particle recoil associated with Rayleigh
scattering (Sec. 5.6B), and ray optics, provide suitable descriptions for the confinement
mechanisms when the trapped particle sizes are, respectively, much smaller than, and
much larger than, the optical wavelength. For homogeneous spherical particles, Mie
scattering theory (Sec. 5.6C) provides accurate numerical results for arbitrary particle
sizes and refractive indices. The confining laser beams can also impart torque to a
trapped particle by transferring spin angular momentum if the beams are circularly
polarized, or orbital angular momentum if they are structured. Examples of the ap-
plication of optical tweezers at the extremes of small and large trapped particles are,
respectively: 1) the confinement of a single A-size neutral atom, thereby enabling it
to be cooled to its three-dimensional vibrational ground state; and 2) the confinement
and manipulation of jum-size objects such as living organisms and DNA molecules.
Variations on the theme, such as magnetic tweezers and acoustic tweezers, have also
been implemented.

14.3 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH ATOMS 601

Magneto-optical traps. The atoms in optical molasses may also be spatially con-
fined by incorporating a magneto-optical trap (MOT) that makes use of an inhomo-
geneous magnetic field. This gives rise to Zeeman splitting of the atomic energy levels
and results in a net position-dependent scattering force that directs the atoms to the
location where the three pairs of laser beams intersect. The net result is cooling and
trapping.

Optical lattices. As indicated above, polarization gradient cooling leads to the
localization of atoms at a spatial scale finer than the wavelength of light. In essence,
the standing waves produced by counterpropagating laser beams in 1D, 2D, or 3D
behave as optical lattices comprising potential wells in which atoms are trapped and
well-localized by the interaction of the AC electric field and the induced atomic dipole
moment (AC Stark effect). The well depth of the optical lattice can be modified by
altering the laser power, while its periodicity can be tuned by changing the laser wave-
length or the relative angle between the laser beams. Moreover, an auxiliary laser field
can facilitate trapping in a lattice potential whose features are far smaller than the wave-
length of the lasers. Limiting the atomic positions in this manner achieves laser cooling
and trapping in a lattice. Optical lattices are important for attaining motional control
of collections of single neutral atoms. They can be used, for example, to hold atoms
whose optical transition can serve as a highly accurate atomic clock (e.g., fermionic
87Sr), or they can be loaded with deterministic arrays of atoms. Optical lattices have
allowed simplified artificial crystals to be generated, whose properties are tunable,
thereby bringing clarity to fundamental features of importance in condensed-matter
physics.

Atom Optics

Atom optics is concerned with the study of beams of moving neutral atoms and the
matter waves associated with them. As with optical waves, matter waves exhibit
phenomena such as reflection, refraction, diffraction, scattering, and interference. The
role of the optical wavelength Л is played by the de Broglie wavelength Лав, which is
related to the momentum р of the atoms by Лав = h/p, where h is Planck’s constant.
This expression is the same as that provided in (13.1-11) for photons; however, the
atomic momentum p = mv is orders of magnitude greater than the photon momentum,
so that Лав < A. As an example, the de Broglie wavelength for thermal Na atoms,
Лав = h/V3kTm = 20 pm (see Exercise 13.1-2), is some 30000 times smaller than
the wavelength of visible light. The coherence length for a thermal atomic beam is also
short, [с 100 pm.

Atom interferometry. Atom interferometry can be conducted with atoms in
beams, magneto-optical traps, or Bose-Einstein condensates. Cooled and trapped
atoms are important components in the arsenal of atom optics since they offer
reduced atomic momentum and uncertainty. Ultracold atoms can exhibit de Broglie
wavelengths as long as 1 ит and coherence lengths that can extend up to J, = 10 им.
Matter-wave interferometry is thus akin to optical interferometry with partially
coherent light (Sec. 12.2). Optical transitions in single atoms confined in optical
lattices often serve as atomic clocks. Atom interferometers are useful for the precise
measurement of acceleration, rotation, and gravity, as well as for the determination of
various atomic and material properties. Unlike photons, however, atoms can interact
strongly so that matter-wave interferometry is often nonlinear.

Bose-Einstein Condensates and Atom Amplifiers

Bose-Einstein condensates. A gas comprising bosonic atoms in thermal equilib-
rium can be treated as a quantum collection of indistinguishable particles described
by the Bose-Einstein distribution presented in (13.2-20) and Fig. 13.2-7, much as
for a photon gas in thermal equilibrium. A Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) can be

602 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER

formed when a bosonic-atom gas is cooled to a temperature sufficiently low that the
particle kinetic energy decreases to a negligible value and Лав becomes comparable to
the interatomic separation. The atomic wavepackets then overlap sufficiently so that
they can be considered as condensing into a single quantum state that minimizes the
system’s free energy (the gas must be sufficiently dilute so that it does not condense into
a liquid or solid as it is cooled). Particles in that state then act collectively as a coherent
wave. A gas of 23Ма atoms cooled below about 1 иК, for example, can form а BEC
that contains somewhere between 10? and 108 atoms and has a spatial extent of tens
of ит. The interference exhibited by two separate Bose-Einstein condensates clearly
illustrates the wavelike properties of matter on a macroscopic scale. The mathematical
description of a BEC in terms of quantized matter waves is not unlike that of quantized
electromagnetic waves in a nonlinear refractive medium.

Miniaturization has led to the production of BECs on specially designed electronic
microchips known as atom chips. Cooled atoms extracted from optical molasses in
an MOT are transferred to a magnetic trap on the chip created by electric currents.
Evaporative cooling is instigated by radiowaves generated by the chip, causing a BEC
to be formed. An atom-chip BEC is being installed in the International Space Station,
where the absence of gravity is expected to enable temperatures to be reduced to the pK
level. BECs provide a path to the generation of synthesized forms of quantum matter
and are expected to offer atom interferometry with unprecedented accuracy.

Atom amplifiers. An atom amplifier relies on increasing the number of atoms
in a beam passed through a BEC atomic cloud that serves as the active medium. The
atom amplifier converts atomic waves in the active medium into atomic waves that
assume the same quantum state as the wave to be amplified. One way to achieve this
is by pumping the BEC with a laser whose photons are scattered by atoms in the BEC
at the precise angles that permits recoiling condensate atoms to augment the input
matter wave, while conserving momentum and energy. Such devices could in principle
be used to improve the performance of atom interferometers. However, since atoms
are conserved and cannot be created on demand, amplified atom beams are typically
weak. The laser amplifier, in contrast, relies on photons, which are readily created in
large numbers on demand, thereby allowing amplified laser light to be made highly
intense. Another distinction between laser and BEC amplifiers is that the laser active
medium comprises noninteracting photons in a distinctly nonequilibrium state whereas
the BEC active medium comprises interacting atoms in thermodynamic equilibrium.

14.4 THERMAL LIGHT

Under conditions of thermal equilibrium, and in the absence of other external energy
sources, a universal form of radiation known as thermal light or blackbody radiation
is emitted from a blackbody (these objects are so-named because they absorb all of
the light incident on them). In this section we determine the properties of thermal light
by examining the interactions among a collection of photons and atoms in thermal
equilibrium. We also show how the thermal light emitted from an object can be used
to image it.

A. Thermal Equilibrium Between Photons and Atoms

A macroscopic rate-equation approach that balances spontaneous emission, absorption,
and stimulated emission, under conditions of thermal equilibrium, leads to the spectral
energy density of thermal light. The point of departure for our analysis is (14.3-13) and
(14.3-24), which govern spontaneous emission and induced transitions, respectively, in

14.4 THERMALLIGHT 603
the presence of broadband light. Consider a cavity of unit volume whose walls consist
of large numbers of atoms with two energy levels, denoted 1 and 2, that are separated
by an energy difference hy. The cavity, which is maintained at temperature 7’, supports
broadband radiation that can be observed through a small hole. Let №1 (+) and No(t)
represent the numbers of atoms per unit volume occupying energy levels 1 and 2, at
time t, respectively. Since some of the atoms are initially in level 2, as ensured by the
finite temperature, spontaneous emission creates radiation in the cavity. This radiation
in turn can induce absorption and stimulated emission. The three processes coexist and
it is assumed that steady-state (equilibrium) conditions are attained. We assume that
an average of n photons occupies each of the radiation modes whose frequencies lie
within the atomic linewidth, as established in (14.3-24).

We first consider spontaneous emission alone. The probability that a single atom in
the upper level undergoes spontaneous emission into any of the modes, within the time
increment from $ to t+ At, is P;,At = ДАНЬ, There are N2(t) such atoms so that the
average number of emitted photons within At is N2(t) At/t;,. This is also the number
of atoms that depart from level 2 during the time interval At. Hence, the (negative) rate
of increase of N2(t) arising from spontaneous emission is described by the differential
equation

dN N
=. (14.4-1)
dt tsp
The solution, N2(t) = N2(0) exp(—t/tsp), is an exponentially decaying function of
time, as displayed in Fig. 14.4-1. Given sufficient time, the number of atoms in the
upper level Nz decays to zero with time constant ¢,,. The energy is carried off by the
spontaneously emitted photons.
N,(t)
№ (0)
Figure 14.4-1 Decay of the upper-level
population caused by spontaneous emission
alone.
р t

We now incorporate absorption and stimulated emission, which contribute to
changes in the populations. Since there are №: atoms capable of absorption, the rate of
increase of the population of atoms in the upper energy level arising from absorption
is, based on (14.3-24),

dN nN
= МИ =——. (14.4-2)
dt tsp
Similarly, stimulated emission gives rise to a (negative) rate of increase of atoms in the
upper state, expressed as
dN nN
— = _N.W; = ———. (14.4-3)
dt tsp
The rates of atomic absorption and stimulated emission are both proportional to п, the
average number of photons in each mode.

604 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Combining (14.4-1), (14.4-2), and (14.4-3) to accommodate spontaneous emission,
absorption, and stimulated emission together, yields the rate equation
dN No TN nN
oo = PO (14.4-4)
dt tsp Esp tsp Rate Equation
This equation ignores transitions into or out of level 2 that arise from other effects, such
as interactions with other energy levels, nonradiative transitions, and external sources
of excitation. Steady-state operation demands that dN2/dt = 0, which leads to
№ n
==. 14.4-5
Ny 1+n7 ( )
Clearly, №2 /№ < 1. If we now make use of the fact that the atoms are in thermal
equilibrium, (14.2-2) dictates that their populations obey the Boltzmann distribution:
N 2 E 2 — Е 1 hv
— = | = —_— }. 14.4-6
Ni exp( kT P\ ET (144-6)
Substituting (14.4-6) into (14.4-5) leads to a mean number of photons per mode near
frequency и given by
п 1 (14.4-7)
=. 4-
exp(hy /kT) —1

The foregoing derivation is predicated on the interaction of two energy levels cou-
pled by absorption, as well as by stimulated and spontaneous emission, at a frequency
near и. The applicability of (14.4-7) is, however, far broader. This may be understood
by considering a cavity whose walls are made of solid materials that possess a contin-
uum of energy levels at all energy separations, and therefore all values of v. Atoms in
the walls spontaneously emit into the cavity. The emitted light subsequently interacts
with the atoms in the walls, giving rise to absorption and stimulated emission. If the
walls are maintained at temperature Т, the combined system of atoms and radiation
reaches thermal equilibrium, whatever the nature of the walls and the shape of the
cavity.

Equation (14.4-7) is identical to (13.2-21) — the expression for the mean photon
number in a mode of thermal light for which the occupation of the modal energy levels
follows the distribution p(n) « exp(—nhv /kT). This indicates a self-consistency in
our analysis. Photons interacting with atoms in thermal equilibrium at temperature
T are themselves in thermal equilibrium at the same temperature T’ (Sec. 13.2C). A
collection of such photons is often termed a “photon gas.”

B. Blackbody Radiation Spectrum
Based on the discussion provided in Sec. 14.4A, the average energy E of a radiation
mode is simply п hv, where п is given by (14.4-7), which leads to
— hy
E = ———_—_.. (14.4-8)
exp(hv/kT) — 1 Average Energy of a
Mode in Thermal Equilibrium

14.4 THERMALLIGHT 605
The dependence of Е оп v, which is identical to that set forth in (13.2-24), is portrayed
in Fig. 14.4-2.
Е
Figure 14.4-2 Semilogarithmic plot of the av-
erage energy E of an electromagnetic mode in
thermal equilibrium at temperature 7’, as a func-
tion of the mode frequency и. At T’ = 300° К,
kT/h = 6.25 THz, which corresponds to a
wavelength of 48 wm.
"Kr КТ 10k и
10h р h
Multiplying the average energy per mode E by the 3D modal density M(v) =
8rv?/c} provided in (11.3-10) gives rise to a spectral energy density o(v) = M(v)E
(energy per unit bandwidth per unit cavity volume) that takes the form
8rhv? 1
&  exp(hv/kT) Spectral Energy Density
for Blackbody Radiation
This formula, known as the blackbody radiation spectrum or Planck spectrum, is
plotted in Fig. 14.4-3 as a function of frequency on double-linear coordinates. A plot
with temperature as a parameter is shown in the iconic graph provided in Fig. 14.4-4.
Е;
kT ~<— Wavelength Л, (ит)
р 102 10 Е 10-1
10-5
AT 4 и
hh $ 10-16 /
0 a и
0 и > 7
= 10-17 9
Mw) Е 7 г- 1000°K
2 10-18 /
Bs V4
5 10-19 Г, й T= 300° K
0 Е
0 и 3 10-20
oY) a c
10°! 5
10-22
% и 10—23
Figure 14.4-3 Frequency de- 10-24
pendence of the energy рег mode 1012 1013 10!4 1055 1016
Е, the density of modes M(v), and Frequency и (Hz) —>
the spectral energy density ov) = Figure 14.4-4 Dependence of the blackbody spectral
M(v)E for blackbody radiation, on energy density o(v) on frequency for several different
double-linear coordinates. temperatures, on double-logarithmic coordinates.

606 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER

As the blackbody temperature is altered, the mean number of photons in the cavity
changes in accordance with (14.4-7) since photons can emerge from, or disappear into,
the walls of the cavity. Though they are bosons, the photons in a blackbody cavity are
not conserved and thus do not form a Bose—Einstein condensate. Bosonic atoms, on
the other hand, are conserved so they can form a BEC when the temperature is reduced
below a critical value (Sec. 14.3F).

The spectrum of blackbody radiation played a central role in the discovery of the
photon nature of light. Based on classical electromagnetic theory, the modal density
for a three-dimensional cavity was long known to be given by M(v) = 87v?/c?, as
provided in (11.3-10). Moreover, the equipartition law in classical statistical mechanics
specified that the average energy per mode was constant at Е = КТ, independent of
the modal frequency. This led to a theoretical expression for the blackbody spectrum,
o(v) = M(v)E = 8nv?kT/c?, known as the Rayleigh—Jeans formula, but it failed to
agree with experiment in a significant way. Max Planck resolved the dilemma in 1900
by observing that imposing quantization on the allowed energies of the atoms in the
walls of the cavity led instead to (14.4-9), a result that agreed with experiment. Einstein
subsequently built on Planck’s approach and proposed that the quantization be imposed
directly on the energy of the electromagnetic radiation, which led to the concept of the
photon. The Rayleigh—Jeans formula is recovered from (14.4-9) in the classical limit
hv < kT by making use of the approximation exp(hy /kT) = 1+ hy /kT.
НИ
EXERCISE 14.4-1
Frequency of Maximum Blackbody Energy Density. Using the blackbody radiation law
o(v), show that the frequency и» at which the spectral energy density is maximum satisfies the
equation 3(1 — e~*) = a, where х = hy,/kT. Find x approximately and determine и» at T =
300° K.
ee

The total power radiated by a blackbody increases with temperature as Т“, a result
known as the Stefan—Boltzmann law (Prob. 14.4-7). Although they are not perfect
blackbodies, planets and stars emit light with a spectral character that approximately
follows (14.4-9). The temperature of the sun and earth, which can be estimated using
the Stefan—Boltzmann law, turn out to be Т = 5800° К and Т = 300° К, respectively.
Thermography
The blackbody spectral energy-density formula (14.4-9) is useful for generating maps
(images) of the temperature distribution of thermal objects. This is achieved by using
a camera that is sensitive in the wavelength region of the object’s thermal emissions
(Fig. 14.4-4). Hot objects, such as the sun, emit most strongly in the visible region,
whereas objects of moderate temperature, such as the earth and humans, typically
radiate in the mid-infrared region. Cold objects radiate in the far-infrared. The imag-
ing of thermal objects by means of their self-radiation is known as thermography.
Thermographic cameras contain an array of photodetectors sensitive in a particular
region of the spectrum (Sec. 19.5). The technique is often used in the wavelength
region 0.7 wm < Ло < 300 wm, corresponding to 12° К < Т < 5200° К. Though
thermography is facilitated at higher temperatures by the Т“ dependence of the total
radiated power, the representative images presented in Fig. 14.4-5 illustrate the broad
range of temperatures that can be accessed.

Thermography is used to garner information about objects and scenes that exhibit
temperature variations. Different local temperatures are typically displayed as false
colors. The technique finds use in industrial applications, such as monitoring the over-
heating of circuit boards and the evolution of oil spills. It is of assistance in search-

14.5 LUMINESCENCE AND SCATTERING 607

40°C 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 22°C 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
<u,
Figure 14.4-5 Representative thermographic images in different temperature regions for use in
industrial-systems analysis (left); search and rescue (center); and cosmology (right).
and-rescue missions for humans and animals, even when they are concealed in dense
foliage at night. Thermography is also used in clinical medicine since skin-surface
temperature is a diagnostic for blood-flow blockages and tumors. Environmental ap-
plications include fire-fighting and forestry. The technique is invaluable in astronomy
and cosmology since it allows astronomical objects, such as cooler red stars and red
giants, to be imaged in the near infrared; planets, comets, and asteroids to be seen in the
mid-infrared; and central galactic regions and emissions from cold dust to be imaged
in the far-infrared.
14.5 LUMINESCENCE AND SCATTERING

Thermal excitation is not the only external source of energy that can result in the
emission of light from a material system that is excited to a higher energy level and
then decays back to its ground state. Other sources of excitation, such as electron
beams, chemical reactions, and electric fields, can also result in light being emitted.
So too can excitation in the form of one or more photons via a process known as
photoluminescence. Nonthermal radiators that operate on this principle are generically
called luminescent radiators and the radiation process is known as luminescence.

While photoluminescence involves the absorption and subsequent emission of pho-
tons, light can also scatter from a material system in a resonant or nonresonant manner.
Linear and nonlinear scattering, such as Rayleigh and Raman scattering, respectively,
play important roles in optics and photonics.

A. Forms of Luminescence

The form of the luminescence is classified according to the source of excitation, as indi-
cated by the examples provided below and illustrated in Fig. 14.5-1. It is also worthy of
mention that most lasers operate by amplifying luminescence radiation via stimulated
emission; the initial source of light is most often photoluminescence, collision-induced
luminescence, or electroluminescence (Chapters 15—18).

Cathodoluminescence. The emission of light from a material as a result of exci-
tation by energetic electrons. Examples are the images at the face of a cathode-ray tube
or an image intensifier, which are induced in phosphors at the screen by the electrons.
Cathodoluminescence is frequently used for assaying the composition of a material
because of two salutary features: 1) the depth of penetration into the sample can be
modified by changing the electron energy, and 2) different material components give
rise to emission at different wavelengths. The light is termed betaluminescence when
the exciting electrons are the result of nuclear beta decay.

608 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
%
Sey В
(a) Cathodoluminescence (b) Sonoluminescence (c) Chemiluminescence
=. ТЕ
¢. *
(d) Bioluminescence (e) Electroluminescence (f) Photoluminescence
Figure 14.5-1 (а) Cathodoluminescence from a mineral sample reveals the presence of zoned
calcite and saddle dolomite in boxwork breccia. The edge dimension is 1.3 mm and the electron
energy is 22 keV (courtesy Charles M. Onasch, Bowling Green State University). (b) Multibubble
sonoluminescence created by an ultrasonic horn immersed in liquid (courtesy Kenneth S. Suslick,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign). (с) Chemiluminescence from a lightstick. (а) The deep-
sea scyphomedusa Afolla vanhoeffeni (diameter = 3 cm) is abundant throughout the world and рго-
duces bioluminescence when disturbed (courtesy Edith A. Widder, Ocean Research & Conservation
Association). (e) The electric field across a pair of parallel wires held at different potentials elicits
electroluminescence from a powdered material coating them. (}) Photoluminescence from colloidal
CdSe quantum dots dispersed in hexane following illumination by ultraviolet light (see Fig. 14.1-13).

Sonoluminescence. The emission of light induced by acoustic cavitation, namely
the formation, growth, and collapse of bubbles in a liquid irradiated with high-intensity
sound or ultrasound. The light comprises brief flashes (duration ~ 100 ps) emitted
when the collapsing bubbles reach minimum size (= 1 ит). Sonoluminescence is
generally observed from clouds of bubbles although it is possible to generate single-
bubble sonoluminescence with a stable period and position by trapping single bubbles
in an acoustic standing wave.

Chemiluminescence. The emission of light via a chemical reaction. Chemilu-
minescence is observed under those relatively rare circumstances when the reaction
between two or more chemicals releases sufficient energy to populate the excited state
of a reaction product. Lightsticks, used for illumination in underwater and military en-
vironments, are an example: they glow when the seal between two compartments con-
taining different chemicals is broken and the chemicals are permitted to mix. The color
of the emitted light is determined by the dye incorporated in the chemical mixture.
Chemiluminescence is responsible for the operation of chemical lasers (Sec. 16.3E).

Bioluminescence. Chemiluminescence produced by living organisms such as fire-
flies and jellyfish. Bioluminescence provides a means of communication; indeed, some
organisms such as fireflies synchronize their flashes. Most deep-sea marine organisms
produce bioluminescence as a matter of course, often in the blue-green region of
the spectrum where seawater is most transparent, but also at other wavelengths. An
important technique employed in biology makes use of genetic engineering to insert
a jellyfish gene that expresses the green fluorescent protein (GFP) adjacent to a gene
in another species that expresses a protein under study. When this latter protein is
generated, it is automatically attached to the bioluminescent indicator protein, thereby
allowing the effects of the protein of interest to be optically tracked in vivo.

14.5 LUMINESCENCE AND SCATTERING 609

Electroluminescence. The emission of light resulting from the application of an
electric field to a material. An important example is injection electroluminescence,
which occurs when an electric current is injected into a forward-biased semiconductor
p—n junction such as that used in a light-emitting diode. The recombination of electrons
from the conduction band with holes from the valence band results in the emission of
photons (Sec. 18.1А).

Photoluminescence. The emission of light by a sample following the absorption
of optical photons. An example is the glow emitted by some materials after exposure
to ultraviolet light. Photoluminescence, which is discussed in greater detail in the next
section, is a useful tool for investigating the properties of semiconductor materials. It
underlies the operation of white-light LEDs and many lasers. Photoluminescence is
termed radioluminescence when the exciting photons are in the X-ray or gamma-ray
region.

Fluorescence and Phosphorescence
Luminescence that appears within a brief time following excitation is also called fluo-
rescence; typical fluorescence lifetimes lie in the range of picoseconds to microsec-
onds. In the context of an organic material such as a dye molecule (Fig. 14.1-8),
fluorescence arises when the radiative transitions are spin-allowed, 1.e., when they take
place between states with the same multiplicity (singlet— singlet or triplet—triplet).
Luminescence that is delayed following excitation is also called phosphorescence;
typical phosphorescence lifetimes are milliseconds or longer. For an organic material,
phosphorescence arises when the radiative transitions are spin-forbidden (e.g., triplet
— singlet).
B. Photoluminescence
Single-Photon Photoluminescence
Photoluminescence occurs when a system excited to a higher energy level by the
absorption of a photon spontaneously decays to a lower energy level, emitting a photon
in the process. To conserve energy, the emitted photon cannot have more energy than
the exciting photon. Several examples of transitions that lead to photoluminescence
are depicted in Fig. 14.5-2. Nonradiative downward transitions can participate in the
process, as shown by the dashed vertical lines in Figs. 14.5-2(5) and (с). Intermediate
downward nonradiative transitions, followed by upward nonradiative transitions, can
also occur, as illustrated in Fig. 14.5-2(d). Photoluminescence occurs naturally in many
materials, including inorganic molecules and crystals, noble gases, aromatic molecules,
and semiconductors.
7 rn 7

1 I 1 |

+ tt

| 1 io
Ww WV  Ллллл> ллллл— Алллл— yo WAVavavavess

SDS

(a) (b) (c) (а)

Figure 14.5-2 Single-photon photoluminescence from materials with different energy-level struc-
tures. Solid and dashed vertical lines represent radiative and nonradiative transitions, respectively.

610 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Photoluminescence has many uses, including:

= The reduction of photon frequency, e.g., the conversion of an ultraviolet photon
into a visible photon.

= The conversion of an ultraviolet photon into a pair of visible photons, a process
known as quantum cutting.

= The delay of photon emission by storage of the excited electron in a long-lived
intermediate state such as a trap.

и The generation of metameric white light by phosphor-conversion LEDs, wherein
blue LED photons irradiate a yellow phosphor; the combination of blue and yel-
low appears white to the eye (Sec. 18.1F).

= The use as a seed for optically pumped lasers.

Multiphoton Photoluminescence
Photoluminescence can also occur when a system is excited to a higher energy level by
the absorption of more than one photon, followed by the emission of a single photon
via spontaneous emission to a lower energy level. The exciting photons can have the
same, or different, energies and the emitted photon can have an energy greater than
that of one of the exciting photons.
Multiphoton fluorescence microscopy. Two or more photons of the same energy
can conspire to raise a material to a higher energy level, where it undergoes photo-
luminescence (fluorescence), as shown schematically in Figs. 14.5-3(a) and (5). Two-
photon fluorescence, illustrated in Fig. 14.5-3(а), is the basis of an imaging technique
known as two-photon microscopy (2PM) [originally called two-photon laser scanning
microscopy (TPLSM)]. A photoluminescent compound, known as a fluorophore, is
attached to specific locations in a biological sample, for example by chemistry, viral
injection, or genetic engineering. A pair of photons (each of energy hv,) arriving at
the location of the fluorophore can be absorbed and result in the emission of a single
fluorescence photon (of energy hvz > hv), thereby providing structural imaging
of the fluorophore locations within the sample, as a function of time. The emission
takes place within the lifetime of the fluorophore, which typically is in the range
of nanoseconds. Making use of an activity-sensitive fluorophore allows functional
imaging to be concomitantly carried out.
——T ST — TT
hy,
ANAS hv, hv, Ул” hv;
hv, D>
hy
(a) (5) (с)
Figure 14.5-3 (a) Two-photon fluorescence. (5) Three-photon fluorescence. (с) Up-conversion
fluorescence. Nonradiative relaxation (dashed vertical lines) is presumed to take part in all of these
examples. Other scenarios are also possible.

The probability of observing two independently arriving photons at a given position
and time is the square of observing a single such photon. Thus, by virtue of (13.1-15),
the two-photon absorption rate at position г and time +, as well as the fluorescence-
photon emission rate, behaves as a quadratic function of the incident intensity, 1.е., it is
proportional to J?(r,t). An advantage of 2PM derives from this quadratic dependence:

14.5 LUMINESCENCE AND SCATTERING 611
a focused excitation beam results in absorption that is localized to the immediate
vicinity of the focal point since two-photon absorption occurs preferentially at lo-
cations where the intensity is greatest. In comparison with ordinary (single-photon)
fluorescence microscopy [Fig. 14.5-2(b)], the region from which fluorescence is ob-
served is thereby sharpened, yielding enhanced resolution; this is also accompanied by
a reduction of the background light arising from out-of-focus fluorescence. Another
important advantage of 2PM in the domain of biology is the increased excitation
wavelength, which penetrates more deeply into biological tissue. To ensure that the
peak intensity is sufficiently high to engender two-photon absorption, and that the
average intensity is sufficiently low to avoid damage to delicate tissue, the excitation is
usually provided by a mode-locked laser that generates femtosecond-duration optical
pulses with high peak power and low average power.

Multiphoton microscopy (MPM) operates in much the same way as two-photon

microscopy, except that К independent photons, rather than two, conspire to effect
each absorption, so that the fluorescence-photon emission rate varies as I* (r,t). In
particular, three-photon microscopy (3PM) is a valuable technique for carrying out
in-vivo, noninvasive, high-resolution imaging in brain tissue. In comparison with 2PM,
the I? (r,t) behavior of the fluorescence-photon emission rate, together with the longer
excitation wavelength [compare Figs. 14.5-3(a) and (6)], result in deeper penetration
into brain tissue and improved performance. Three-photon microscopy requires opti-
cal pulses of sufficiently high energy, short duration, and long wavelength. Optimal
wavelengths for brain-tissue imaging lie in the vicinity of 1300 nm for blue and green
fluorophores and 1700 nm for orange and red fluorophores. Structural and functional
imaging of populations of neurons deep within the intact mammalian brain has been
effected by using a calcium-sensitive GFP fluorophore that is sensitive to neural activ-
ity, in conjunction with 1300-nm ultrafast pulses generated by a noncollinear optical
parametric amplifier. Deep-brain 3PM imaging has also been conducted by making
use of a red fluorophore excited by 1675-nm optical solitons generated in a photonic-
crystal rod (Example 23.5-3).
3D multiphoton microlithography. A approach complementary to multiphoton
fluorescence microscopy is useful for fabricating micro-objects. A lens delivers
femtosecond-duration high-intensity optical pulses to a particular location in a spe-
cially designed transparent polymeric material. The intensity of the light is sufficient
to effect multiphoton polymerization only in the vicinity of the focal region of the
lens; its intensity before reaching the focal region is insufficient to polymerize the
intervening material. Moving the focal point of the lens about allows any desired
three-dimensional microstructure to be written. As an additional benefit, in practice
the strong thresholding behavior of the polymerization nonlinearity serves to further
increase the resolution of the microstructure (see, e.g., Sec. 7.3B).
Up-conversion fluorescence. Multiphoton photoluminescence can also take place
when the two photons that conspire to excite the system have different energies, as
illustrated in Fig. 14.5-3(c). This scheme is useful for converting infrared photons to
visible ones. An infrared photon of low energy (hiv) teams up with a more energetic
auxiliary photon (hv2) to excite a system such as a single ion or atom, which then
produces a luminescence photon at or near the sum energy (Риз = hv, + hv).

Up-conversion fluorescence via sequential absorption can be observed most easily
in materials containing traps that can store the electron elevated by the first photon for
a time sufficient for the second photon to arrive and boost the system to its upper
state. Phosphors doped with rare-earth ions such as Er** are often used. In some
materials, the traps can be charged to their intermediate state in minutes by exposing
the material to daylight or fluorescent light, thereby providing the auxiliary photons

612 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER

of energy hv2. The arrival of an infrared signal photon of energy hv, then releases an
electron from the trap, which results in the emission of a visible luminescence photon
with an energy at or near h(v, + v2). Up-conversion fluorescence can also occur via
more complex processes, such as collective emission from two nearby ions that have
both been excited.

A practical up-conversion-fluorescence device used in the laboratory often takes the
form of a small reflective or transmissive card with an active area of about 5cm x 5 ст,
known as an infrared sensor card. Upconverting powder is laminated between a pair
of stiff transparent plastic sheets to form the card. Upconverting powder can also be
dispersed in a block of polymer for three-dimensional viewing. Though the conversion
efficiency of these devices is typically quite small, they are nevertheless useful for
visually viewing the spatial distribution of an infrared beam, such as that produced by
an infrared laser. The relative infrared detection sensitivity and the visible emission
spectral intensity of a commercially available card are portrayed in Fig. 14.5-4.

Visible Infrared
| | emission / \ sensitivity Figure 14.5-4 Relative infrared de-
tection sensitivity and relative visible
spectral intensity for up-conversion fluo-
rescence from a commercially available
infrared sensor card.
600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
Wavelength (nm)

C. Scattering

Photoluminescence, as considered in Sec. 14.5B, involves the resonant absorption of a

photon via a transition between the ground state and a real excited state; the subsequent

relaxation of the excited state back to the ground state results in the emission of a

luminescence photon. Absorption and subsequent re-emission from a real upper state

are the defining characteristics of luminescence, fluorescence, and phosphorescence.

Light scattering processes can involve transitions that occur via virtual states. Since
they are often nonresonant interactions, light can be scattered over a broad range of
frequencies. We consider in turn three scattering processes of importance in optics
and photonics, as portrayed in Fig. 14.5-5: Rayleigh, Raman, and Brillouin scattering.
Scattering is inherent and unavoidable, and usually undesirable, but it also proves
useful for providing information about the characteristics of the scattering medium
and for creating useful sources of light.

Rayleigh Scattering

Rayleigh scattering is a process whereby a medium causes an incident photon to
change direction. It entails an energy-conserving (elastic) interaction so that the scat-
tered photon has the same energy as the incident photon, as schematized in Fig. 14.5-
5(a). Rayleigh scattering occurs in gases, liquids, and solids. It is engendered by vari-
ations in a medium that are finer than the wavelength of light, such as random density
fluctuations in air or random refractive-index inhomogeneities in glass (Sec. 10.3A). It
can also be brought about by the presence of particles whose sizes are much smaller
than the wavelength of light, such as electrons, atoms, molecules, or nanoparticles. As
discussed in Sec. 5.6B, the scattered intensity is proportional to и“, and thus to 1/4,
where и and Ло are the frequency and wavelength of the illumination, respectively.
Short wavelengths thus undergo greater scattering than long wavelengths; Rayleigh

14.5 LUMINESCENCE AND SCATTERING 613

WAVAVAVAV Ang AVAVAVAVAVs oP AVAVA'AV Ai WAVAVAV ЧИ АТ АТАТАТ А МААЛАЛЛю=  АЛЛЛЛ АЛ
hy hv, hy | hug hy hv, hy fs
hip hug
hip
(а) (b) (с) @

Figure 14.5-5 Several forms of light scattering: (a) Rayleigh; (b) Raman (Stokes); (c) Raman
(anti-Stokes); and (d) Brillouin. Dashed horizontal lines indicate virtual states and therefore
nonresonant scattering.
scattering is responsible for the blue color of the sky. Scattering from spherical particles
larger than = Ло/10 is known as Mie scattering; its strength does not depend strongly
on the wavelength of the illumination. Mie scattering is responsible, as an example, for
the white glare around a light source in the presence of mist or fog (Sec. 5.6C).
Raman Scattering
Raman scattering is a process by means of which a photon of frequency Риму, follow-
ing an inelastic interaction with a material, emerges either at a lower frequency hy; =
hv, — Ри» (Stokes scattering) ог at a higher frequency hv, = hv, + hip (anti-Stokes
scattering), as displayed in Figs. 14.5-5(b) and (с), respectively. Raman scattering
occurs in gases, liquids, and solids. Unlike Rayleigh scattering, Raman scattering is
inelastic; the alteration of photon frequency is brought about by an exchange of energy
hve with a rotational and/or vibrational mode of a molecule or solid. In Stokes scat-
tering, the photon imparts energy to the material system, whereas the reverse occurs
in anti-Stokes scattering. In general, the spectrum of light scattered from a material
contains a Rayleigh-scattered component, at the incident frequency, together with red-
shifted and blue-shifted sidebands corresponding to inelastically scattered Stokes and
anti-Stokes components, respectively. Though the sideband power is typically weak
for nonresonant interactions, lying a factor of 10-7 below that of the incident light,
Raman scattering is useful for characterizing materials. In crystalline materials, the
vibrational spectrum is generally discrete and the Raman lines are narrow. Glasses, in
contrast, have broad vibrational spectra that in turn give rise to broad Raman spectra.
Brillouin scattering, portrayed in Fig. 14.5-5(d), is similar to Raman scattering except
that the exchange of energy hv, takes place with acoustic, rather than vibrational,
modes of the medium.
Stimulated Raman Scattering
Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) can take place when a signal photon enters a
nonlinear optical medium together with a pump photon of higher frequency (inset in
Fig. 15.3-7). The signal photon stimulates the emission of a second signal photon,
which is obtained by Stokes-shifting the pump photon so that its frequency precisely
matches that of the input signal photon. The surplus energy of the pump photon is
transferred to the vibrational modes of the medium. The process bears some similarity
to stimulated emission, but the Raman interaction is a third-order nonlinear optical
process (Sec. 22.3B).

Stimulated Raman scattering is useful for making optical amplifiers (Sec. 15.3D)
and lasers (Sec. 16.3C). Raman amplifiers and Raman lasers have the distinct merit that
the bandwidth over which they can operate is governed by the vibrational spectrum of
the material rather than by the linewidth of a transition. The vibrational spectrum of

614 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER

glass is particularly broad, so that a length of glass optical fiber can serve as a fiber
amplifier or fiber laser that is tunable over a range of hundreds of nm. Raman optical
amplifiers and Raman fiber lasers are used in dense wavelength-division-multiplexed
optical fiber communication systems (Sec. 25.3C).

Stimulated Raman scattering is also useful as a spectroscopic tool since it can reveal
the underlying vibrational characteristics of a material. The sensitivity of Raman-based
spectroscopy can be enhanced by making use of coherent anti-Stokes Raman scat-
tering (CARS), which uses two pump lasers whose frequency difference is resonant
with the vibrational frequency of the material under investigation, thereby increasing
the efficiency of wave mixing.

In another important application, Raman processes are useful for generating broad-
band light in optical fibers. A pump gives rise to Raman-scattered spontaneous emis-
sion that is amplified via stimulated Raman scattering as the light and pump propagate
through the fiber. For an optical fiber of sufficient length, and a pump of sufficient
strength, the resulting Raman spectrum initiates yet further Raman frequency conver-
sion, resulting in the production of broadband (supercontinuum) light (Sec. 23.5C).
Stabilization of the process can be achieved by making use of a resonator. Stimulated
Brillouin scattering is similar to SRS except that acoustic vibrations, rather than
molecular vibrations, are involved.

READING LIST
Quantum Mechanics
See also the reading list in Chapter 13.
Р. В. Berman, Introductory Quantum Mechanics: A Traditional Approach Emphasizing Connections

with Classical Physics, Springer-Verlag, 2018.

M. G. Raymer, Quantum Physics: What Everyone Needs to Know, Oxford University Press, 2017.

J. Greensite, An Introduction to Quantum Theory, IOP Publishing, 2017.

S. Weinberg, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2015.

L. E. Ballentine, Quantum Mechanics: A Modern Development, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2015.

L. Susskind and A. Friedman, Quantum Mechanics: The Theoretical Minimum, Basic/Perseus, 2014.
E. D. Commins, Quantum Mechanics: An Experimentalist’s Approach, Cambridge University Press,

2014.

О. A.B. Miller, Quantum Mechanics for Scientists and Engineers, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, Addison—Wesley, 1958.

P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 4th ed. 1958.
Atomic, Molecular, and Solid-State Physics

See also the reading lists in Chapters 15-18.

M. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, S. B. Cronin, and A. G. S. Filho, Solid State Properties: From Bulk

to Nano, Springer-Verlag, 2018.

H. Friedrich, Theoretical Atomic Physics, Springer-Verlag, 4th ed. 2017.

J. В. Ketterson, The Physics of Solids, Oxford University Press, 2016.

P. Hofmann, Solid State Physics: An Introduction, Wiley-VCH, 2nd ed. 2015.

J. Lucas, P. Lucas, T. Le Mercier, A. Rollat, and W. Davenport, Rare Earths: Science, Technology,

Production and Use, Elsevier, 2015.

C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, 8th ed. 2012.
C. Cohen-Tannoudji and D. Guéry-Odelin, Advances In Atomic Physics: An Overview, World Scien-

tific, 2011.

P. W. Atkins and R. S. Friedman, Molecular Quantum Mechanics, Oxford Univ. Press, 5th ed. 2011.
D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, and D. P. DeMille, Atomic Physics: An Exploration Through Problems and
Solutions, Oxford University Press, 2nd ed. 2008.

READINGLIST 615

M. Schwoerer and H. C. Wolf, Organic Molecular Solids, Wiley-VCH, 2007.

W. Demtréder, Molecular Physics: Theoretical Principles and Experimental Methods, Wiley-VCH,
2005.

M. Born, Atomic Physics, Blackie & Son, 1935, 8th ed. 1969; Dover, reissued 1989.

D. ter Haar, The Old Quantum Theory, Pergamon, 1967 [contains English translations of key early
papers by Planck, Einstein, Rutherford, and Bohr].

E. U. Condon and G. H. Shortley, The Theory of Atomic Spectra, Cambridge University Press, 1935.

Interaction of Radiation and Matter

See also the reading lists in Chapters 15-18.

J. Weiner and Е. Nunes, Light-Matter Interaction: Physics and Engineering at the Nanoscale, Oxford
University Press, 2nd ed. 2017.

P. van der Straten and H. J. Metcalf, Atoms and Molecules Interacting with Light: Atomic Physics for
the Laser Era, Cambridge University Press, 2016.

G. Grynberg, A. Aspect, and C. Fabre, Introduction to Quantum Optics: From the Semi-Classical
Approach to Quantized Light, Cambridge University Press, 2010.

M. Planck, Planck’s Columbia Lectures: Abridged and Unabridged Versions, with commentary by
W. Vlasak, Adaptive Enterprises, 2005.

J. H. van Vleck and D. L. Huber, Absorption, Emission, and Linebreadths: A Semihistorical Perspec-
tive, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 49, pp. 939-959, 1977.

E. M. Purcell, Spontaneous Emission Probabilities at Radio Frequencies, Proceedings of the Amer-
ican Physical Society, Cambridge, MA, April 25-27, 1946, Abstract B10, (Physical Review,
vol. 69, p. 681, June 1946).

М. Géppert-Mayer, Uber Elementarakte mit zwei Quantenspriingen, Annalen der Physik, vol. 9,
pp. 273-294, 1931.

A. Einstein, Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung, Physikalische Zeitschrift, vol. 18, рр. 121-128, 1917
[Translation: On the Quantum Theory of Radiation, in D. ter Haar, The Old Quantum Theory,
Pergamon, 1967].

Laser Cooling and Trapping, Atom Optics, and Bose-Einstein Condensates

С.Е. Мага, В. В. Hutson, A. Goban, $. L. Campbell, М. Poli, and J. Ye, Imaging Optical Frequencies
with 100 Hz Precision and 1.1 zm Resolution, Physical Review Letters, vol. 120, 103201, 2018.

C. W. Gardiner and P. Zoller, The Quantum World of Ultra-Cold Atoms and Light. Book III: Ultra-
Cold Atoms, World Scientific, 2017.

J. L. Bohn, A. M. Ray, and J. Ye, Cold Molecules: Progress in Quantum Engineering of Chemistry
and Quantum Matter, Science, vol. 357, pp. 1002—1010, 2017.

Р.Н. Jones, O. M. Магаоб, and С. Volpe, Optical Tweezers: Principles and Applications, Cambridge
University Press, 2015.

M. J. Padgett, J. Molloy, and D. McGloin, eds., Optical Tweezers: Methods and Applications, CRC
Press/Taylor & Francis, 2010.

A. D. Cronin, J. Schmiedmayer, and D. E. Pritchard, Optics and Interferometry with Atoms and
Molecules, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 81, pp. 1051-1129, 2009.

V. Letokhov, Laser Control of Atoms and Molecules, Oxford University Press, 2007.

A. Ashkin, Optical Trapping and Manipulation of Neutral Particles Using Lasers: A Reprint Volume
with Commentaries, World Scientific, 2006.

F. Bardou, J.-P. Bouchaud, A. Aspect, and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, Lévy Statistics and Laser Cooling:
How Rare Events Bring Atoms to Rest, Cambridge University Press, 2002.

W. Ketterle, Nobel Lecture: When Atoms Behave as Waves: Bose-Einstein Condensation and the
Atom Laser, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 74, pp. 1131-1151, 2002.

Е. A. Cornell and С. Е. Wieman, Nobel Lecture: Bose-Einstein Condensation in a Dilute Gas, the
First 70 Years and Some Recent Experiments, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 74, pp. 875-893,
2002.

P. Meystre, Atom Optics, Springer-Verlag, 2001.

H. J. Metcalf and P. van der Straten, Laser Cooling and Trapping, Springer-Verlag, 1999.

616 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER

W. D. Phillips, Laser Cooling and Trapping of Neutral Atoms, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 70,
pp. 721-741, 1998.

C. N. Cohen-Tannoudji, Manipulating Atoms with Photons, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 70,
pp. 707—719, 1998.

$. Chu, The Manipulation of Neutral Particles, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 70, pp. 685-706,
1998.

A. Einstein, Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases, Sitzungberichte der Preussischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, vol. XXII, pp. 261-267, 1924; vol. 1, pp. 3-14, 1925.

Thermal Physics, Thermography, and Statistical Physics

J. P. Casquilho and P. I. С. Teixera, Introduction to Statistical Physics, Cambridge University Press,
2015.

H. J. W. Miiller-Kirsten, Basics of Statistical Physics, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2013.

М. J. В. Hoch, Statistical and Thermal Physics: An Introduction, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2011.

A. L. Wasserman, Thermal Physics: Concepts and Practice, Cambridge University Press, 2011.

М. Vollmer and K.-P. Méllmann, Infrared Thermal Imaging: Fundamentals, Research and Applica-
tions, Wiley-VCH, 2010.

L. E. Reichl, A Modern Course in Statistical Physics, Wiley-VCH, 3rd ed. 2009.

C. Kittel, Elementary Statistical Physics, Wiley, 1958; Dover, reissued 2004.

Luminescence, Multiphoton Fluorescence, and Scattering

K. Yasui, Acoustic Cavitation and Bubble Dynamics, Springer-Verlag, 2018.

S. Martini and S. H. D. Haddock, Quantification of Bioluminescence from the Surface to the Deep
Sea Demonstrates Its Predominance as an Ecological Trait, Scientific Reports, vol. 7, 45750, 2017.

U. Kubitscheck, ed., Fluorescence Microscopy, Wiley-VCH, 2nd ed. 2017.

р. С. Ouzounov, T. Wang, М. Wang, О. О. Feng, М. С. Horton, J. С. Cruz-Hernandez, Y.-T. Cheng,
J. Reimer, А. $. Tolias, М. Nishimura, and С. Xu, м Vivo Three-Photon Imaging of Activity of
GCaMP6-Labeled Neurons Deep in Intact Mouse Brain, Nature Methods, vol. 14, pp. 388-390,
2017.

P. Гесод, A. Gektin, and М. Korzhik, Inorganic Scintillators for Detector Systems: Physical Princi-
ples and Crystal Engineering, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2016.

М. Сай, В. Reisfeld, and О. Panczer, Modern Luminescence Spectroscopy of Minerals and Materials,
Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2015.

X. Chen, Y. Liu, and D. Tu, Lanthanide-Doped Luminescent Nanomaterials: From Fundamentals to
Bioapplications, Springer-Verlag, 2014.

О. М. Jameson, Introduction to Fluorescence, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2014.

K. Wang, N. G. Horton, and C. Xu, Going Deep: Brain Imaging with Multiphoton Microscopy, Optics
& Photonics News, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 32-39, 2013.

М. G. Horton, К. Wang, О. Kobat, С. G. Clark, Е. W. Wise, С. В. Schaffer, and С. Xu, т Vivo Three-
Photon Microscopy of Subcortical Structures within an Intact Mouse Brain, Nature Photonics,
vol. 7, рр. 205-209, 2013.

O. Shimomura, Bioluminescence, World Scientific, revised ed. 2012.

J. В. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Springer-Verlag, 3rd ed. 2006.

B. R. Masters, Confocal Microscopy and Multiphoton Excitation Microscopy: The Genesis of Live
Cell Imaging, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2006.

B.R. Masters, ed., Selected Papers on Multiphoton Excitation Microscopy, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 175), 2003.

D. A. Long, The Raman Effect: A Unified Treatment of the Theory of Raman Scattering by Molecules,
Wiley, 2002.

M. J. Damzen, V. I. Vlad, V. Babin, and A. Mocofanescu, Stimulated Brillouin Scattering: Funda-
mentals and Applications, Institute of Physics, 2002.

В. H. Cumpston, S. P. Ananthavel, S. Barlow, О. L. Dyer, J. Е. Ehrlich, L. L. Erskine, A. A. Heikal,
$. М. Kuebler, I.-Y. $. Lee, D. McCord-Maughon, J. Qin, H. Réckel, М. Rumi, X.-L. Wu,
S. R. Marder, and J. W. Perry, Two-Photon Polymerization Initiators for Three-Dimensional
Optical Data Storage and Microfabrication, Nature, vol. 398, pp. 51-54, 1999.

PROBLEMS 617

M. J. Weber, ed., Selected Papers on Phosphors, Light Emitting Diodes, and Scintillators: Appli-

cations of Photoluminescence, Cathodoluminescence, Electroluminescence, and Radiolumines-
cence, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 151), 1998.
W. Denk, J. H. Strickler, and W. W. Webb, Two-Photon Laser Scanning Fluorescence Microscopy,
Science, vol. 248, рр. 73—76, 1990.
B. J. Berne and R. Pecora, Dynamic Light Scattering: With Applications to Chemistry, Biology, and
Physics, Wiley, 1976; Dover, reissued 2000.
PROBLEMS

14.3-3 Comparison of Stimulated and Spontaneous Emission. An atom with two energy levels
corresponding to a transition with characteristics Л. = 0.7 wm, ts» = 3 ms, Ди = 50 GHz,
and Lorentzian lineshape, is placed in a resonator of volume V = 100 cm? and refractive
index п = 1. Two radiation modes (one at the center frequency мо and the other at vp +
Av) are each excited with 1000 photons. Determine the probability density for stimulated
emission (or absorption). If № such atoms are excited to energy level 2, determine the
time constant for the decay of № due to stimulated and spontaneous emission. Find the
number of photons that should be present (instead of 1000) in order for the decay rate due
to stimulated emission to equal that due to spontaneous emission?

14.3-4 Spontaneous Emission into Prescribed Modes.

(a) Consider a 1-итаЗ cubic cavity containing a medium of refractive index n = 1. Consult-
ing Sec. 11.4, determine the mode numbers (41, 42, 93) of the lowest- and next-higher-
frequency modes. Show that these frequencies are 260 and 367 THz, respectively.

(b) Now consider a single excited atom in the cavity when it contains zero photons. Let
Dsp1 be the probability density (s~) that the atom spontaneously emits a photon into
the (2, 1,1) mode, and let p,,2 be the probability density that the atom spontaneously
emits a photon with frequency 367 THz. Determine the ratio pepo /Psp1-

14.4-2 Rate Equations for Broadband Radiation. A resonator of unit volume contains atoms
with two energy levels whose associated transition has resonance frequency хо and
linewidth Av. There are №М and Nz atoms in the lower and upper levels, 1 and 2,
respectively, and a total of п photons in each of the modes within a broad frequency
band surrounding vo. Photons are lost from the resonator at a rate 1 [Tp as a result of
imperfect reflection at the cavity walls. Assuming that there are no nonradiative transitions
between levels 2 and 1, write the rate equations for №5 and п.

14.4-3 Inhibited Spontaneous Emission. Consider a two-dimensional blackbody radiator (e.g., a
square plate of area A) in thermal equilibrium at temperature T’.

(a) Determine the density of modes M(v) and the spectral energy density (i.e., the energy
in the frequency range between v and v + dv per unit area) of the emitted radiation o(v)
(see Sec. 11.3).

(b) Find the probability density of spontaneous emission P,, for an atom located in a cavity
that permits radiation only in two dimensions. Such a cavity may be made, for example,
by using photonic-crystal omnidirectional reflectors above and below a slab.

14.4-4 Comparison of Stimulated and Spontaneous Emission in Blackbody Radiation. Find
the temperature of a thermal-equilibrium blackbody cavity emitting a spectral energy den-
sity o(v) when the rates of stimulated and spontaneous emission from the atoms in the
cavity walls are equal at Ло = 1 wm.

14.4-5  Wien’s Law. Show that the wavelength spectral energy density ох(Л) [ох(Л) dA is the
energy per unit volume in the wavelength region between Л and + dA] is given by

8rhe 1
orl) = \5~ Solhe/\RT) 1’

so that @,(A)/e,(v) = c/A?. Show also that the wavelength A, at which the spectral

energy density is maximum satisfies the equation 5(1 — e~¥) = у, where у = he/AykT,

demonstrating the validity of the relationship ЛьТ = constant (Wien’s law) is satisfied.

618 CHAPTER 14 LIGHT AND MATTER
Find A,7' approximately. Show that A, 7 с/и,, where и, is the frequency at which
the blackbody energy density о(и) is maximum (Exercise 14.4-1). The shapes and peak
locations of density functions are dependent on the representation chosen.

14.4-6 Spectral Energy Density of One-Dimensional Blackbody Radiation. Consider a one-
dimensional blackbody radiator of length Г, in thermal equilibrium at temperature T.

(a) Determine the density of modes M(v) (number of modes per unit frequency per unit
length) in one dimension.

(b) Using the average density E of a mode of frequency v, determine the spectral energy
density (i.e., the energy in the frequency range between и and и + dy per unit length)
of the blackbody radiation o(v). Sketch o(v) versus м.

14.4-7 Stefan—Boltzmann Law. Use the conventional expression for the spectral energy density
for blackbody radiation provided in (14.4-9) to confirm that the total power radiated is
proportional to 7“, in accord with the Stefan—Boltzmann law. Determine the proportionality
constant. Hint: |” ах 23 /(е* — 1) = 14/15.

*14.5-1 Statistics of Cathodoluminescence Light. Consider a beam of electrons impinging on the
phosphor of a cathode-ray tube. Let тп be the mean number of electrons striking a unit area
of the phosphor in unit time. If the number m of electrons arriving in a fixed time is random
with a Poisson distribution, and the number of photons emitted per electron is also Poisson
distributed but with mean G, find the overall distribution p(n) of the emitted cathodolumi-
nescence photons. The result is known as the Neyman Type-A distribution.” Determine
expressions for the mean П and the variance о2. Hint: Use conditional probability.

¥ See М. С. Teich, Role of the Doubly Stochastic Neyman Type-A and Thomas Counting Distributions in
Photon Detection, Applied Optics, vol. 20, pp. 2457-2467, 1981.

CHAPTER
ee
15.1 THEORY OF LASER AMPLIFICATION 622

A. Gain and Bandwidth
B. Phase Shift
15.2 AMPLIFIER PUMPING 626
A. Rate Equations
B. Pumping Schemes
15.3 REPRESENTATIVE LASER AMPLIFIERS 636
A. Ruby
B. Neodymium-Doped Glass
С. Erbium-Doped Silica Fiber
D. Raman Fiber Amplifiers
E. Tabulation of Selected Laser Transitions
15.4 AMPLIFIER NONLINEARITY 645
A. Saturated Gain in Homogeneously Broadened Media
*В. Saturated Gain in Inhomogeneously Broadened Media
*15.5 AMPLIFIER NOISE 651
1 =
—— E fr
Charles H. Townes Nikolai G. Basov Aleksandr M. Prokhorov
(1915-2015) (1922-2001) (1916-2002)
Townes, Basov, and Prokhorov developed the principle of Light Amplification by Stimulated
Emission of Radiation (LASER). They received the Nobel Prize for this work in 1964.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
619

ee
A coherent optical amplifier is a device that increases the amplitude of an optical
field while maintaining its phase. If the optical field at the input to such an amplifier is
monochromatic, the output will also be monochromatic with the same frequency. The
output amplitude is increased relative to the input while the phase remains unchanged
or is shifted by a fixed amount. In contrast, an incoherent optical amplifier increases
the intensity of an optical wave without preserving its phase. Coherent optical am-
plifiers play an important role in applications ranging from the amplification of weak
optical pulses, such as those that have traveled through a long length of optical fiber,
to the generation of high-intensity optical pulses, such as those required to achieve
laser fusion. Understanding the operation of optical amplifiers serves as a prelude to
understanding the operation of optical oscillators, considered in Chapter 16.

The underlying principle for achieving the coherent amplification of light is
Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation, which forms the acronym
LASER. Stimulated emission (Sec. 14.3) allows a photon in a given mode to induce
an atom with an electron in an upper energy level to undergo a transition to a lower
energy level and, in the process, to emit a clone photon into the same mode as the
initial photon. A clone photon has the same frequency, direction, and polarization as
the initial photon. These two photons in turn serve to stimulate the emission of two
additional photons, and so on, while preserving these properties. The result is laser
amplification. Because stimulated emission can occur only when the photon energy
is nearly equal to the energy difference between the upper and lower energy levels,
the light-amplification process is restricted to a band of frequencies determined by
the atomic-transition linewidth. Though the presentation throughout this chapter is
couched in terms of “atoms” and “atomic energy levels,” these appellations are to be
more broadly understood as “active medium” and “laser energy levels,” respectively.

Light transmitted through matter in thermal equilibrium is attenuated. This is be-
cause absorption by a large population of atoms in the lower energy level is more
prevalent than stimulated emission by the smaller population of atoms in the upper
level. An essential ingredient for achieving laser amplification is the presence of a
greater number of atoms in the upper energy level than in the lower level, a non-
equilibrium situation (Sec. 14.2). Achieving such a population inversion requires a
source of power, called a pump, that excites the atoms from the lower to the higher
energy level, as illustrated in Fig. 15.0-1.

Pump

Figure 15.0-1 The laser amplifier.
| Atoms An external power source (the pump)
excites the active medium (represented
Input — =a Output by a collection of atoms) so that it has
photons — о Photons a population inversion. Photons interact
“oun with the atoms. When stimulated emis-
. и и 4 Л “3 fe sion is more prevalent than absorption,
Сы а м. the medium acts as а coherent laser

— о amplifier.

Laser amplification differs in a number of respects from electronic amplification.
Electronic amplifiers rely on devices in which small changes of an injected electric
current (or applied voltage) result in large changes in the rate of flow of charge car-
riers, such as electrons and holes in a semiconductor field-effect transistor (FET) or
bipolar junction transistor. Tuned electronic amplifiers make use of a resonant circuit
or resonator (e.g., a capacitor/inductor ог a metal cavity — see Fig. 11.0-2) to limit
the gain of the amplifier to the band of frequencies of interest. In contrast, atomic,
620

CHAPTER 15 LASERAMPLIFIERS 621
molecular, ionic, and solid-state laser amplifiers rely on differences in their allowed
energy levels to provide the principal frequency-selection mechanism. These entities
act as natural resonators that select the frequency of operation and bandwidth of the
amplifier. Optical resonators are often used to provide auxiliary frequency tuning.

The properties of an ideal optical or electronic coherent amplifier are illustrated
schematically in Fig. 15.0-2(a). It comprises a linear system that increases the am-
plitude of the input signal by a fixed factor, the amplifier gain. A sinusoidal input
leads to a sinusoidal output at the same frequency, but with a larger amplitude. The
gain of the ideal amplifier is constant for all frequencies within the amplifier spectral
bandwidth. The amplifier may impart to the input signal a phase shift that varies
linearly with frequency, corresponding to a time delay at the output with respect to
the input (Sec. B.1 of Appendix B).

с Сат ~3 | |
Input Ideal amplifier Output zs
(a) й / Phase ё=
AMAA: > t 4 % и Input amplitude
. Gain 8
Input Real amplifier Output 22 —
(b) / ога é =
AS aS
VVVVVV t и у Input amplitude
Figure 15.0-2 (а) An ideal amplifier is linear. It serves to increase the amplitude of a signal (whose
frequencies lie within its bandwidth) by a constant gain factor, and possibly introduces a linear phase
shift. (b) A real amplifier typically has a gain and phase shift that are functions of frequency. For large
values of the input, the output signal saturates and the real amplifier exhibits nonlinearity.

A teal coherent amplifier, on the other hand, delivers a gain and phase shift that are
frequency-dependent, typically in the manner illustrated in Fig. 15.0-2(b). The gain and
phase shift determine the transfer function of the amplifier. For a sufficiently large input
amplitude, a real amplifier generally exhibits saturation, a form of nonlinear behavior
in which the output amplitude does not increase in proportion to the input amplitude.
Saturation introduces harmonic components into the output, provided that the amplifier
bandwidth is sufficiently broad to allow them to pass. A real amplifier also introduces
noise, so that a random fluctuating component is present at the output, regardless of
the input.

An amplifier is thus characterized by the following features:

= Gain

= Bandwidth

= Phase shift

и Power source

= Nonlinearity and gain saturation

= Noise
This Chapter
In this chapter, we discuss the features listed above in turn. In Sec. 15.1 the theory
of laser amplification is developed, and expressions for the amplifier gain, spectral
bandwidth, and phase shift are obtained. The mechanisms by means of which a power
source pumps the active medium and achieves a population inversion are examined in
Sec. 15.2. A number of representative laser amplifiers are considered in Sec. 15.3. Sec-
tions 15.4 and 15.5 are devoted to nonlinearity and noise in the amplification process,
respectively. The material in this chapter relies on the exposition of the interaction of
photons with atoms set forth in Sec. 14.3.

622 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS

15.1 THEORY OF LASER AMPLIFICATION
A monochromatic optical plane wave traveling in the z direction with frequency и,
electric field &(2) = Re{E(z)exp(j2mvt)}, complex amplitude F(z), intensity
I(z) = |E(z)|?/2n, and photon-flux density ¢(z) = I(z)/hv (photons per second per
unit area) will interact with an atomic medium, provided that the atoms of the medium
have two energy levels whose energy difference nearly matches the photon energy hv.
The numbers of atoms per unit volume in the lower and upper energy levels are denoted
N, and No, respectively. The wave is amplified with a gain coefficient y(v) (per unit
length) and undergoes a phase shift y(v) (per unit length). We proceed to determine
expressions for y(v) and y(v). Positive y(v) corresponds to amplification; negative
y(v) corresponds to attenuation.
A. Gain and Bandwidth
In accordance with Sec. 14.3, three forms of photon—atom interaction take place. If
the atom is in the lower energy level, the photon may be absorbed. If it is in the upper
energy level, a clone photon may be emitted by the process of stimulated emission.
These two processes lead to attenuation and amplification, respectively. The third form
of interaction, spontaneous emission, in which an atom in the upper energy level emits
a photon independently of the presence of other photons, is responsible for amplifier
noise (Sec. 15.5).

The probability density (s~') that an unexcited atom absorbs a single photon is,
according to (14.3-19) and (14.3-15),

И/; = gov), (15.1-1)
where o(v) = (A?/87tsp) g(v) is the transition cross section at the frequency и,
g(v) is the normalized lineshape function, t,, is the effective spontaneous lifetime for
stimulated emission, and Л is the wavelength of light in the medium. The probability
density for stimulated emission is the same as that for absorption.
Gain Coefficient
The average density of absorbed photons (number of photons per unit time per unit
volume) is N\W;. Similarly, the average density of clone photons generated as a result
of stimulated emission is N2W;. The net number of photons gained per second per unit
volume is therefore NW;, where М = № — М1 is the population density difference,
which is often simply referred to as the population difference. If N is positive, a
population inversion exists, in which case the medium can act as an amplifier and
the photon-flux density of a wave passing through the medium can increase. If N is
negative, the medium acts as an attenuator and the photon-flux density decreases. If
N = 0, the medium is transparent.

Since the incident photons travel in the z direction, the stimulated-emission photons
also travel in that direction, as illustrated in Fig. 15.1-1. An external pump providing a
population inversion (№ > 0) then causes the photon-flux density ¢(z) to increase with
z. Because emitted photons stimulate further emissions, the growth at any position z is
proportional to the population at that position; Ф(=) thus increases exponentially.

To demonstrate this process explicitly, consider an incremental cylinder of length
dz and unit area, as shown in Fig. 15.1-1. If @(z) and $(2) + d@(z) are the photon-flux
densities entering and exiting the incremental cylinder, respectively, then d¢(z) must
be the photon-flux density emitted from within the cylinder. This incremental number
of photons per unit area per unit time, d¢(z), is simply the number of photons gained

15.1 THEORY OF LASER AMPLIFICATION 623
Output
Input ф ф+аф light
light >
г
0 < 5+4 а
Figure 15.1-1 The photon-flux density ¢ (photons/cm?-s) entering an incremental cylinder
containing excited atoms grows to ¢ + аф after traveling a distance dz.
per unit time per unit volume, NW;, multiplied by the thickness of the cylinder dz:
dé = NW; dz. (15.1-2)
With the help of (15.1-1), (15.1-2) can be written in the form of a differential equation,
4
OO уе) (15.1-3)
where
2
y(v) = No(v) = N— g(v). (15.1-4)
8itsp Gain Coefficient
The coefficient y(v) represents the net gain in the photon-flux density per unit length
of the medium. The solution of (15.1-3) is the exponentially increasing function
(2) = $(0) exply(v) +]. (15.1-5)
Since the optical intensity I(z) = hv@(z), (15.1-5) can also be written in terms of Г as
I(z) = 1(0) exp[y(v) z]. (15.1-6)
Thus, y(v) also represents the gain in the intensity per unit length of the medium.
The amplifier gain coefficient y(v) is seen to be proportional to the population
difference N = № — М1. Though N was taken to be positive in the example provided
above, the derivation is valid whatever the sign of М. In the absence of a population
inversion, N is negative (Nz < М1) and so too is the gain coefficient. The medium will
then attenuate (rather than amplify) light traveling in the z direction, in accordance
with the exponentially decreasing function ¢(z) = ¢(0)exp[—a(v) z], where the
attenuation coefficient a(v) = —y(v) = —No/(v). Hence, a medium in thermal
equilibrium provides attenuation and cannot provide laser amplification.
Gain
For an interaction region of total length d (Fig. 15.1-1), the overall gain of the laser
amplifier G'(v) is defined as the ratio of the photon-flux density at the output to that at
the input, 1.е., G(v) = ¢(d)/¢(0), so that
G(v) = exp[y(v)d]. (15.1-7)
Amplifier Gain

624 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS

Bandwidth

The dependence of the gain coefficient y(v) on the frequency of the incident light и

is contained in its proportionality to the lineshape function g(v), as given in (15.1-

4). The latter is centered about the atomic resonance frequency 1) = (E2 — E1)/h,

where E> and Е1 are the atomic energy levels, and is of width Av. Since stimulated

emission and absorption are governed by the atomic transition, the laser amplifier
is a resonant device, with a resonance frequency and bandwidth determined by the
lineshape function of the atomic transition. The linewidth Av is measured either in
units of frequency (Hz) or in units of wavelength (nm), which are related by AA =
|A(co/v)| = (co/v?)Av = (A2/co)Av. Thus, a linewidth Av = 1 THz at A, =
0.6 ита corresponds to AA = 1.2 nm.
If the lineshape function is Lorentzian, for example, (14.3-34) provides
Av /2n
и) = о. 15.1-8

9) > ри + (А т

The gain coefficient is then also Lorentzian with the same width, 1.е.,
(Av /2)?

и) = (о 15.1-9
as illustrated in Fig. 15.1-2, where y(vp) = N(A?/47?t,,Av) is the gain coefficient at
the central frequency 1.
yV)

Figure 15.1-2 Gain coefficient y(v)
Av of a Lorentzian-lineshape resonant laser
amplifier.
0
0 и и

НИ

EXERCISE 15.1-1

Attenuation and Gain т а Ruby Laser Amplifier.

(a) Consider a ruby (Cr?+:A103) crystal with two energy levels separated by an energy difference
corresponding to a free-space wavelength Л, = 694.3 nm. The transition has a Lorentzian
lineshape function of width Ди = 330 GHz, a spontaneous lifetime ¢,, = 3 ms, and ruby
has a refractive index n = 1.76 (Table 15.3-1). If N; + No = М. = 1022 сш-3, determine the
population difference N = Nz — М: and the attenuation coefficient at the line center a(vp) under
conditions of thermal equilibrium at T’ = 300° К, so that the Boltzmann distribution (Sec. 14.2)
is obeyed.

(b) What value should the population difference N assume to achieve а gain coefficient y(v) =
0.5 cm! at the central frequency?

(c) How long should the ruby crystal be to provide an overall gain of 4 at the central frequency when
(м) = 0.5 cm~1?

НИ

15.1 THEORY OF LASER AMPLIFICATION 625
B. Phase Shift
Because the gain of the resonant medium is frequency dependent, the medium is
dispersive (Sec. 5.5) and a frequency-dependent phase shift must be associated with its
gain. The phase shift imparted by the laser amplifier can be determined by considering
the interaction of light with matter in terms of the electric field rather than the photon-
flux density or the intensity, as we have done in the foregoing. We proceed instead with
an alternative approach, in which the mathematical properties of a causal system are
used to determine the phase shift. For homogeneously broadened media, the phase-
shift coefficient y(v) (phase shift per unit length of the amplifier medium) is related
to the gain coefficient y(v’) by the Hilbert transform (Sec. B.1 of Appendix В), so that
knowledge of y(v) at all frequencies uniquely determines y(v).

The optical intensity and the complex amplitude of the field are related by I(z) =
|E(z)|?/2n. Since I(z) = I(0) expfy(v) =] in accordance with (15.1-6), the field
complex amplitude must obey the relation

E(z) = E(0) exp[$y(v) =] exp[-jy(v) |, (15.1-10)
where y(v) is the phase-shift coefficient. The field complex amplitude evaluated at
z+ Az is therefore

E(z+ Az) = E(0) exp[y(v) (z+ Az)| exp [—jy(v) (= + Az)}
= E(z) exp[zy(v) Az] exp[—je(v) Az]
= Е(=) [1 + 4y(v) Az — jp(v) Az], (15.1-11)
where we have made use of a Taylor-series to approximate the exponential functions.
The incremental change in the electric field, AE(z) = E(z + Az) — E(z), therefore
satisfies the equation
AE(z .
ane) = E(z)|$yv(v) — je(v)]- (15.1-12)
z
This incremental amplifier may thus be regarded as a linear system whose input and
output are Е(=) and AE(z)/Az, respectively, and whose transfer function is
H(v) = $y(v) — je(v). (15.1-13)
Because this incremental amplifier represents a physical system, it must be causal. But
the real and imaginary parts of the transfer function of a linear causal system are related
by the Hilbert transform (Sec. B.1 of Appendix В). It follows that —y(v) is the Hilbert
transform of $Y (Vv) so that the amplifier phase shift coefficient is determined by its gain
coefficient. A simple example is provided by a Lorentzian atomic lineshape function
with narrow width Av < 1, for which the gain coefficient y(v) is given by (15.1-9).
The corresponding phase shift coefficient y(v) is provided in (B.1-13) of Sec. B.1,
vr-y
y(v) = xy y(v). (15.1-14)
и Phase-Shift Coefficient
(Lorentzian Lineshape)
The Lorentzian gain and phase-shift coefficients are plotted in Fig. 15.1-3 as functions
of frequency. At resonance, the gain coefficient is maximum and the phase-shift coef-
ficient is zero. The phase-shift coefficient is negative for frequencies below resonance
and positive for frequencies above resonance.

626 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
у)
— < Ли
Figure 15.1-3 Gain coefficient y(v)
and phase-shift coefficient y(v) for a
laser amplifier with a Lorentzian line-
shape function.
и и
pl)
м и
15.2 AMPLIFIER PUMPING
Like other amplifiers, laser amplifiers require an external source of power to provide
the energy required to augment the input signal. The pump supplies this power via a
mechanism that excites the electrons in the atoms, causing them to move from lower
to higher atomic energy levels. To achieve amplification, the pump must provide a
population inversion on the transition of interest (N = N2—N, > 0). The mechanics of
pumping often involves the use of ancillary energy levels. As an example, the pumping
of atoms from level (Г) into level (0), to achieve amplification on the @—+( transition,
might be most readily achieved by pumping atoms from level (D into level (3) and then
relying on lifetime-based decay from level (3) to populate level @).

As discussed at the end of Sec. 15.2B, pumping may be achieved in many ways,
e.g., by optical, electrical, or chemical means. To attain the continuous-wave (CW)
operation of a laser amplifier, the rates of excitation and decay of the various energy
levels participating in the process must be balanced to maintain a steady-state inverted
population on the @)—>( transition.

A. Rate Equations

The equations that describe the rates of change of the population densities № and
№5 as a result of pumping, as well as radiative and nonradiative transitions, are called
rate equations. They are not unlike the first-order differential equations presented in
Sec. 14.4, but selective external pumping is now part of the process so that thermal-
equilibrium conditions no longer prevail.

Consider the schematic energy-level diagram of Fig. 15.2-1. We focus on levels (Г)
and (2), which have overall lifetimes 7, and то, respectively, which accommodate
transitions to lower energy levels. The lifetime of level @ has two contributions —
Тот is associated with decay from @) to (Г while 729 is associated with decay from
@) to all other lower levels. When several modes of decay are possible, the overall
transition rate is a sum of the component transition rates. Since the rates are inversely
proportional to the decay times, the reciprocals of the decay times must be summed:

Ty) = Ty + тб. (15.2-1)
Multiple modes of decay therefore shorten the overall lifetime (1.е., they render the

15.2 AMPLIFIERPUMPING 627
decay more rapid). Aside from the radiative spontaneous emission component ts, in
721, a nonradiative contribution 7,, may also be present (arising, for example, from a
depopulating collision of the atom with the wall of the container), so that

Ty = ty +t. (15.2-2)
If an unpumped system such as that illustrated in Fig. 15.2-1 is allowed to reach steady
state, the population densities № and №5 will vanish by virtue of all of the electrons
having ultimately decayed to lower energy levels.
_
@ т I 1 1
21 a>
Si Figure 15.2-1 Energy levels (Г) and Q,
tp | Е Ton I along with their decay times.
© | |
т ‚20
у" у
Steady-state populations of еуе1$ (Г) and (2) can be maintained, however, if the en-
ergy levels above level (2) are continuously excited by pumping and ultimately populate
level (2), as shown in the more realistic energy-level diagram of Fig. 15.2-2. Pumping
serves to bring atoms out of level (Г) and into level @, at rates К1 and Ry (per unit
volume per unit time), respectively, as shown in simplified form in Fig. 15.2-3. As a
result, levels () and (2) can achieve nonzero steady-state populations.
Q———————_—_—
© аа
—_——t_ |
1
—`"5" у т. у 720
Figure 15.2-3 Energy levels (Г) ап4 (2) and
— their decay times. By means of pumping, the
Figure 15.2-2 Energy levels @ and (2), to- _ population density of level @ is increased at the
gether with surrounding higher and lower energy ге R» while that of level © is decreased at the
levels, in the presence of pumping. rate R,.
We now proceed to write the rate equations for this system both in the absence, and in
the presence, of amplifier radiation (the radiation resonant with the @)—( transition).
Rate Equations in the Absence of Amplifier Radiation
The rates of increase of the population densities of levels (2) and (© arising from
pumping and decay are, respectively,
а№ №
—— = А. — — 15.2-3
dt 2 72 ( )
dN N N
РЕНА 14. (15.2-4)
dt T1 T21

628 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
Under steady-state conditions (dN; /dt = dN2/dt = 0), (15.2-3) and (15.2-4) can be
solved for N; and №, which provides a population difference N = № — М1 given by
т
T21 Steady-State Population Difference
(Absence of Amplifier Radiation)
where the symbol No represents the steady-state population difference № in the absence
of amplifier radiation.

In accordance with (15.1-4), a large gain coefficient requires a large population
difference, 1.е., a large positive value of №. Equation (15.2-5) demonstrates that this
may be achieved by:

= Large А! and Ro.

и Long 72 (but ts), which contributes to 72 through 721, must be sufficiently short

so as to make the radiative transition rate large, as will be seen subsequently).

и Short 7, if Ry < (72/721) Ro.

The physical rationales that underlie these conditions make good sense. The upper level
should be strongly pumped and decay slowly so that it retains its population. The lower
level should strongly depump so that it quickly disposes of its population. Ideally, it
is desirable to have 721 = ts) «< Тод so that то = ts, and т, < tsp. Under these
conditions, (15.2-5) simplifies to

№ = Ratsp + Кут. (15.2-6)
In the absence of depumping (К! = 0), or when А: < (tsp/71) Re, this result further
simplifies to

№ = Ко. (15.2-7)

[шп ии
EXERCISE 15.2-1
Optical Pumping. Assume that R, = 0 and that Re is realized by exciting atoms from the ground
state Е = 0 to level @ using photons of frequency F2/h absorbed with transition probability W.
Assume that Tz © ts, and т! < tsp so that in steady state N; = 0 and No = Rotsp. If Nz is the total
population of levels ©), @, and @, show that Ко = (Nz — 2No)W, so that the population difference
is No © NatspW/(1 + 24, М).
ee
Rate Equations in the Presence of Amplifier Radiation
The presence of radiation near the resonance frequency хо enables transitions between
levels (2) and (@ to take place via stimulated emission and absorption. These processes
are characterized by the probability density W; = ¢o(v), as provided in (15.1-1) and
illustrated in Fig. 15.2-4. At this juncture, we assume for simplicity that o(v), and
therefore W;, are identical for absorption and emission. This assumption is not valid in
general, however, as will be discussed subsequently.

Extending the rate equations (15.2-3) and (15.2-4) to include the population loss
and gain associated with amplifier radiation yields

dN N

— = Ry — 2 — NW, + NW; (15.2-8)
dt T2

dN N М

ЕЮ +424 МИ — МХ. (15.2-9)
dt п Та

15.2 AMPLIFIERPUMPING 629
С) Figure 15.2-4 Population densities N, and №
R, т! of atoms in energy levels (Г) and (2), respectively,
w-! are determined by three processes: decay (at rates
' < +>7Т› 1/7 and 1/72, respectively, which includes the
(1) effects of spontaneous emission), depumping and
В I | pumping (at rates А: and Ro, respectively), and
wa т В т. absorption and stimulated emission (at the same
У У 120 rate И/; with corresponding time constant W,').
The population density of level @ is decreased by stimulated emission from level (2)
to level (Г) and increased by absorption from level (Г) to level @. The spontaneous
emission contribution is contained in 72;. The population densities are generally spec-
ified in units of cm~? - s~!. Under steady-state conditions (dN,/dt = dN2/dt = 0),
(15.2-8) and (15.2-9) are readily solved for Ny and №, which leads to a population
difference М = № — М: given by
м № (15.2-10)
1+ 75Wi Steady-State Population Difference
(Presence of Amplifier Radiation)
where No is the steady-state population difference in the absence of amplifier radiation
provided т (15.2-5). The characteristic time 7,, given by
r= mtn (1 _ =) , (15.2-11)
721 Saturation Time Constant
is always positive since T2 < тот.

In the absence of amplifier radiation, W; = 0 so that (15.2-10) reverts to N = No, as
expected. Because 7, is positive, the steady-state population difference in the presence
of amplifier radiation always has a smaller absolute value than in its absence, 1.е.,
|N| < | No]. If the radiation is sufficiently weak so that т, ИИ; < 1 (the small-signal ap-
proximation), it suffices to take № = No. As the amplifier radiation becomes stronger,
W; increases and ultimately № — 0, regardless of the initial sign of No, as shown in
Fig. 15.2-5. This result emerges because stimulated emission and absorption dominate
the interaction when ИИ; is very large and they have equal probability densities. It is
apparent that even very strong radiation cannot convert a negative population difference
into a positive one, nor vice versa. The quantity 7, plays the role of a saturation time
constant, as is evident from Fig. 15.2-5.

N
2 Figure 15.2-5 Depletion of the steady-state
з population difference М = № — М, as the
Е No EN rate of absorption and stimulated emission W;
32 increases. When W; = 1/7,, N is reduced by a
2 factor of 2 from its value when ИИ; = 0.

0 ——

01 1 10 и,
т, т, т,

630 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
ee
EXERCISE 15.2-2
Saturation Time Constant. Show that if ts, < ть, (where ть, is the nonradiative part of the
lifetime 721 of the @— transition) and т! < tsp < 70, then т. © tsp.
НИ
В. Pumping Schemes
We proceed to examine a number of pumping schemes used to achieve laser amplifi-
cation via a population inversion on the @)—>() transition. We consider four pumping
systems in turn: 1) four-level pumping; 2) three-level pumping; 3) quasi-three-level
pumping; and 4) in-band pumping. With the exception of three-level pumping, all of
these schemes are widely used in practice.
Four-Level Pumping
In the four-level pumping arrangement, displayed in Fig. 15.2-6, level (Г) lies above
the ground state (designated as the lowest energy level ©)). In thermal equilibrium,
level (Г) will be virtually unpopulated provided that EF; >> КТ, a situation that is, of
course, desirable since it enhances the population inversion.
Ыым— (3) Short-lived level
Rapid
decay ! 732
| ! (2) Long-lived level
г
Pump Laser w-! GH 2
1 To, 1 1
R
т H (1) Short-lived level
1
Кара т т
decay | ! | *”
' 1
ИВ, ПО ИВ (0) Ground state
Figure 15.2-6 Energy levels and decay rates for a four-level system. The four levels are drawn
from a multitude of levels (not shown). The rate of pumping into level @), and out of level ©),
are taken to be the same. In a four-level system, level (Г) is assumed to be unpopulated in thermal
equilibrium. A quasi-three-level system has the same configuration except that level (Г) is sufficiently
close to the ground state ©) that it retains population in thermal equilibrium. The majority of laser
amplifiers and lasers encountered in practice are four-level or quasi-three-level systems.
Pumping is achieved by making use of an energy level (or collection of energy levels)
that lies above level (2); we designate this as level G). The G)—>@) transition has a short
lifetime (decay occurs rapidly) so there is little population accumulation in level @).
Level @ is long-lived, so that it accumulates population, whereas level (ТГ) is short-
lived so that it sheds population; a population inversion is thereby established between
levels (2) and (0. All told, four energy levels are involved in the process but the optical
interaction of interest takes place between levels (2) and (О.

An external source of energy (e.g., photons at frequency и = E3/h) pumps atoms
from level ©) to level (3) at a rate К. If the decay from level @) to level @ is sufficiently
rapid, it may be taken to be instantaneous, whereupon pumping to level (3) is equivalent
to pumping to level (2) at the rate Ro = К. The situation is then the same as that shown
in Fig. 15.2-4 so that the expressions in (15.2-10) and (15.2-11) apply. With respect
to the value of No to be used in these expressions, atoms are neither pumped into nor
out of level (Г) in the four-level system, so that R; = 0. In the absence of amplifier

15.2 AMPLIFIERPUMPING 631
radiation (W; = ¢ = 0), therefore, the steady-state population difference is given by
(15.2-5) with R; = 0, ie.,

№ = Вт (1 _ п.) (15.2-12)
721
Also, in most four-level systems, the nonradiative decay component in the @—-@
transition is negligible (¢,, < Tnr) and т! < ts) «< T9 (Exercise 15.2-2), so that
No = Rtsp (15.2-13)
Ts © tsp, (15.2-14)
whereupon (15.2-10) becomes Re
Nx — т. 15.2-15
Implicit in the preceding derivation is Фе assumption that Фе pumping rate R is
independent of the population difference N = № — М1. This is not always the case,
however, because the population densities of the ground state and level (3), М, and N3
respectively, are related to № and № by
Ng + Ni + No + М = Na, (15.2-16)
where the total atomic density in the system, Ма, is a constant. If the pumping involves
a transition between the ground state and level (3) with transition probability W, then
К = (N, — N3)W. If levels (Г) and @) are short-lived, then №1 = N3 = 0, whereupon
Ма- № = Ма so that Ny = Ма — № = М - М. Under these conditions, the pumping
rate can be approximated as
Rx(Na—-—N)W, (15.2-17)
which reveals that the pumping rate is a linearly decreasing function of the population
difference N and is thus clearly not independent of it. This arises because the pop-
ulation inversion established between levels @ and (Г) reduces the number of atoms
available to be pumped. Substituting (15.2-17) into (15.2-15) and reorganizing terms
leads to
М = ___tspNaW — (15.2-18)
Finally, then, the population difference can be written in the generic form of (15.2-10):
No
N = ——_ 15.2-19
| |
where No and ть, rather than being expressed аз (15.2-13) and (15.2-14), become
tsp Ма ИИ ts
No = —2* 15.2-20 РР. 15.2-21
oe Tew | (5220) бет (15.2-21)
For weak pumping (W < 1/ts,), Мо = tspNaW is proportional to the pumping tran-
sition probability density W, and т. = tsp, so that (15.2-13) and (15.2-14) reemerge.
However, as the pumping strength increases, No decreases and ultimately saturates,
while 7, decreases.

632 CHAPTER15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
Three-Level Pumping
A three-level pumping arrangement, in contrast, makes use of the ground state (E, =
0) as the lower laser level (Г), as depicted in Fig. 15.2-7. Again, an auxiliary third
level (designated (3)) is involved and the G)—@) decay is rapid so that there is no
buildup of population in level (). The @)—>() decay is slow (732 < 731) so that the
pumping serves to populate level (2), the upper laser level, which is long-lived and
therefore accumulates population. Atoms are pumped from level (Г) to level @) (e.g.,
by absorbing light at frequency и = E3/h) at a rate К; the fast (nonradiative) decay
effectively pumps level @) at the rate Ro = R. The thermally excited population of
level (2) is assumed to be negligible.
GB) Short-lived level
Rapid
р decay ! 732
и р т @ Long-lived level
Laser | w;" T21
@) Ground state
Figure 15.2-7 Energy levels and decay rates for a three-level system. A multitude of other energy
levels exist, but they are not germane to the considerations at hand. It is assumed that the rate of
pumping into level (3) is the same as the rate of pumping out of level (ТО.

It is not difficult to see that under гара (3)—0) decay, the three-level system dis-
played in Fig. 15.2-7 is a special case of the system shown in Fig. 15.2-4 (provided
that А is independent of №) with the parameters

К: = Ro=R, та = ©, Т2 = Т21. (15.2-22)
To avoid algebraic problems in connection with the value т! = со, rather than substi-
tuting these special values into (15.2-10) and (15.2-11), we return to the original rate
equations (in the presence of radiation), (15.2-8) and (15.2-9). In steady state, both of
these equations provide the same result:
N
0 = R—-— — NW, + МИХ. (15.2-23)
T21
It is not possible to determine both N; and № from a single equation relating them.
However, knowledge of the total atomic density №, in levels (), @, and @) provides
an auxiliary condition that does permit N, and № to be determined. Since 732 is very
short, level (3) retains a negligible steady-state population; all of the atoms that are
raised to it immediately decay to level @). Thus,

Ni + № = М, (15.2-24)
which enables us to solve (15.2-23) for М and № and thereby to determine the
population difference М = № — М: and the saturation time т.. The result may be
cast in the usual form of (15.2-10), М = No/(1+7,W;), where now

No = 2R721 — Na (15.2-25)

Ts = 2721. (15.2-26)
When nonradiative decay from level (2) to level ( is negligible (1.е., ts, < Tr), T21
may be replaced by ¢,,, whereupon

No © 2Rtsp — Na (15.2-27)

Ts & 5. (15.2-28)

15.2 AMPLIFIER PUMPING 633
The dependence of the pumping rate R on the population difference N can be
included in the analysis of the three-level system by writing R = (N,—N3)W, МЗ = 0,
and N; = 5 (№ — М), from which we obtain В ~ $(N, — N)W. Substituting this in
the principal equation N = (2Rts, — Na)/(1 + 2tspW;), and reorganizing terms, we
can write the population difference in the usual form,
No
N = ———_.,, 15.2-29
| |
but now with
Na(tspW — 1) 2ts
No & SP 15.2-30 я. 15.2-31
° 1+t.W ( ) 8 TH topW ( )

Just as with the results for the four-level scheme presented in (15.2-20) and (15.2-21),

No and 7, saturate as the pumping transition probability W increases.

Comparison of Three- and Four-Level Pumping

It is of interest to compare (15.2-27) and (15.2-28) for three-level pumping with the

analogous results (15.2-13) and (15.2-14) for four-level pumping. Attaining a popu-

lation inversion (№ > 0 and therefore № > 0) in the three-level system requires

a pumping rate К > N,/2ts,. Thus, just to make the population density № equal

to Nj; (i.e., No = 0) requires a substantial pump power density, E3N,/2tsp. The large

population in the ground state (which is the lowest laser level) is an inherent obstacle to
achieving a population inversion in a three-level system. This impediment is avoided in

a four-level system, where level (Г) is normally empty since 7 is short. The saturation

time constant т, = tsp for the four-level pumping scheme is half that for the three-level

scheme.

НИ

EXERCISE 15.2-3

Pumping Power т Three- and Four-Level Systems.

(a) Determine the pumping transition probability W required to achieve a zero population difference
in a three- and a four-level laser amplifier.

(b) If the pumping transition probability W = 2/t,, in the three-level system, and W = 1/2t,, in
the four-level system, show that Nj = N,/3. Compare the pumping powers required to achieve
this population difference.

НИ

Quasi-Three-Level Pumping

Quasi-three-level pumping is a scheme intermediate between four-level and three-

level pumping. As displayed in Fig. 15.2-6, its configuration is identical to that of four-

level pumping; the sole distinction is that the lower laser level (Г) is sufficiently close to
the ground state ©) that it retains some population in thermal equilibrium. As with the
four-level system, pumping is achieved via auxiliary level (3); the G@)—@ transition
is rapid; the upper laser level @) is long-lived; a population inversion is established
between levels (2) and (); and the lower laser level (Г) is short-lived. However, because
of the residual population in level (), reabsorption at the transition frequency makes the
task of achieving a population inversion more challenging than in four-level pumping.
Many lasers operate via quasi-three-level pumping.

634 — СНАРТЕВ 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS

In-Band Pumping

It is not possible to create a steady-state population inversion using an idealized two-
level system and direct optical pumping. This is a consequence of the fact that the pump
creates as much stimulated emission as absorption so that, at best, the populations
can equalize; this can be readily understood from the rate-equation analysis discussed
in Prob. 15.2-4. To circumvent this limitation, pumping schemes typically rely on an
auxiliary level G) to funnel population to the upper laser level (2), as discussed earlier
in connection with four-level, three-level, and quasi-three-level pumping.

However, narrow isolated energy levels, such as those portrayed in Figs. 15.2-6 and
15.2-7, are idealizations. Though they are suitable for formulating laser rate equations
and for understanding how three- and four-level pumping schemes operate, the energy
levels in real materials often comprise collections of sublevels. An example is provided
by the well-known Nd?+:YAG laser transition at 1.064 ит portrayed in Fig. 14.1-5.
As shown in far greater detail in Fig. 14.1-6, the levels designated by the term symbols
“Тор, “Ty1/2, and *F3/2, corresponding to laser levels @, ©, and @, respectively,
consist of manifolds that contain collections of multiple sublevels.

The presence of these sublevels within each level makes it possible to nest the pump
band @) and upper laser level (2) within a single manifold, and the lower laser level D
and ground state ©), within another. This scheme, illustrated in Fig. 15.2-8, is known
as in-band pumping. It is also referred to as quasi-two-level pumping since the pair
of manifolds superficially resembles a two-level system. Pumping and laser action
are readily implemented at distinct frequencies in this pumping scheme. Since the
frequency of the pump v, is greater than that of the laser и., as depicted in Fig. 15.2-
8, the pump preferentially raises ions to the higher sublevels of the upper manifold.
The active ions quickly thermalize (over a time scale of ps), and fall to the lower
sublevels where they are available for laser-induced stimulated emission. They are then
immune to pump-induced stimulated emission as well as to laser-induced reabsorption
since the higher sublevels of the lower manifold are only weakly populated at normal
temperatures. Since the processes of absorption and emission access different sublevels
within the manifolds, the transition cross sections for the two processes generally
differ, and therefore so do the probability densities W; for absorption and stimulated
emission. The effective absorption cross section and effective emission cross section
are denoted озь(и) and dem(v), respectively.

С Figure 15.2-8 In-band pumping. The pump band @)
о and the upper laser level @ are nested within the upper
manifold while the lower laser level (Г) and the ground

state ©) are nested within the lower manifold. The pump

Pump and laser photons have energies hv, and hv,, respectively.
The absorption spectrum is on the high-frequency side of

the emission spectrum so that a population inversion can

be implemented by strong pumping at a frequency higher

[- @ than the peak of the emission spectrum. The effective

absorption and emission cross sections, оаь(и) and Gem(V),
© ——— respectively, generally differ.

In-band pumping is widely used. It can be employed in four-level systems such as
Nd?+:YAG and Nd**:glass, where the lower laser level is well above the ground state,
as well as in quasi-three-level systems such as Yb*+:YAG, where the lower laser level
is near the ground state. In the latter case, the energies of the pump and laser photons
are quite close to each other so that the fraction of pump photon energy lost in the
course of generating a lower-frequency laser photon is small. This fraction, known as
the quantum defect, is given by

q=1-—V,/Up. (15.2-32)

15.2 AMPLIFIER PUMPING 635

The smaller the quantum defect q, the higher the pumping efficiency. Though in-band
pumping enjoys the benefit of a small quantum defect, the gain of such systems can be
adversely affected by the presence of pump-induced stimulated emission and signal-
induced reabsorption, as discussed above.
Pumping Methods
Many techniques are available for pumping laser amplifiers and lasers, the most com-
mon of which make use of electrical and optical means. Electrical pumping can be
implemented by passing a current, or an electron or ion beam, through a medium. In
laser diodes, electrical pumping is realized by injecting charge carriers in the form of
electrons and holes (Sec. 18.3). Solid insulating laser media such as crystals, doped
glasses, and doped ceramics usually make use of optical pumping; indeed, lasers are
often used to pump laser amplifiers and other lasers. The efficiency of pumping varies
considerably, depending on the form of pumping and the system under consideration.
Electrical pumping is generally highly efficient, particularly for laser diodes, whereas
optical pumping can be quite inefficient if an appreciable fraction of pump photons are
lost and/or if their energy is not fully utilized (e.g., if the quantum defect q is large).

Several common methods of electrical and optical pumping are illustrated schemat-
ically in Fig. 15.2-9.

[L] Cathode Anode 1
ae Gas NY Ег’*:$ Шса fiber
и и И МИ: Laser [ens
- diode
©
, о ем |
Laser-diode Lens Nd**:YVOq rod
array
Rod Flashlamp

Figure 15.2-9 Examples of electrical and optical pumping. (a) Direct current (DC) is often used
to pump gas lasers. The current may be passed either along the laser axis, creating a longitudinal
discharge, or transversely to it. (b) Radio-frequency (RF) discharges are also used for pumping gas
lasers. (c) Xe flashlamps or Kr CW arc lamps can be used to optically pump ruby and rare-earth-
doped solid-state laser amplifiers and lasers. (4) Semiconductor laser diodes, which are themselves
electrically pumped, are widely used for pumping Er?" :silica-fiber laser amplifiers and other rare-
earth-doped fiber amplifiers. (e) An array of laser diodes is generally used for the efficient optical
pumping of Nd?*:YVO, and other solid-state laser amplifiers and lasers, as well as for fiber lasers.

Pumping schemes that excite various forms of luminescence radiation are discussed
in Sec. 14.5A. As will become apparent in Sec. 16.3, a variety of schemes aside from
electrical and optical pumping find use in laser amplifiers and lasers. Chemical lasers
make use of chemical reactions that lead to reaction products in excited states. Atomic
X-ray lasers and amplifiers rely on focused laser-beam heating to create a plasma of
ionized atoms in excited states. Relativistic electron beams serve as pumps for free-
electron laser amplifiers and lasers. Nuclear pumping makes use of a stream of high-
energy X-rays or other particles derived from nuclear reactions, radioisotopes, or a
nuclear detonation.

636 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
15.3 REPRESENTATIVE LASER AMPLIFIERS

Laser amplification can take place in a great variety of materials. The energy-level
diagrams for a number of representative atoms, ions, molecules, solids, and doped
dielectrics that exhibit laser action are displayed in Sec. 14.1. Practical laser systems
usually involve a plethora of interacting energy levels that influence the population
densities associated with the transition of interest, @—(, as illustrated in Fig. 15.2-2.
Nevertheless, the essential principles of laser-amplifier operation may be codified in
terms of the pumping schemes set forth in Sec. 15.2.

This is illustrated by several laser systems that we consider in turn: the three-
level ruby laser amplifier, the four-level neodymium-doped glass laser amplifier, and
the quasi-three-level erbium-doped silica-fiber laser amplifier. The neodymium-doped
glass and erbium-doped silica-fiber amplifiers are also amenable to in-band pumping.
Most laser amplifiers and lasers operate on the basis of four-level, quasi-three-level, or
in-band pumping schemes, but three-level ruby is of interest for historical and didactic
reasons. All three of the laser amplifiers discussed here are doped dielectrics and hence
are optically pumped. We also consider an optically pumped amplifier that operates
on the basis of stimulated Raman scattering, rather than stimulated emission. All of
these amplifiers also operate as laser oscillators (Sec. 16.3). The semiconductor optical
amplifier, which is almost always electrically pumped, is described in Sec. 18.2.

Many laser amplifiers are used as power amplifiers (also called postamplifiers), in
which the amplifier is used to increase the power of a high-quality, but low-power laser
oscillator called a seed laser or master-oscillator. Such systems, known as master-
oscillator power-amplifiers (MOPAs), offer a number of advantages that will be elu-
cidated in Sec. 16.3B. They find use in applications such as cable television (CATV),
where strong, clean signals must be generated before being fanned out into multiple
fiber channels. MOPAs comprise various combinations of different types of lasers and
amplifiers, including diode-pumped solid-state, semiconductor, and fiber devices. In
the special case when a fiber amplifier serves as the power amplifier, a MOPA is also
referred to as a master-oscillator fiber-amplifier (MOFA).

Other laser amplifiers are used as in-line amplifiers (also called line amplifiers).
An example is provided by the erbium-doped silica-fiber amplifier, which serves to
boost optical signals in-line as they traverse long-haul optical fiber communication
links (Sec. 25.1C). Yet another amplifier configuration is the optical preamplifier,
which boosts a signal before it is sent to another amplifier or to a photodetector
(Fig. 25.1-5). Laser amplifiers are often operated in the saturation regime to reduce
noise (Sec. 15.4).

A. Ruby

Ruby is a dielectric medium with refractive index п = 1.76. It consists of sapphire
(Al,O3) in which chromium ions (Cr?*) replace a small percentage (= 0.05%) of the
aluminum ions (Sec. 14.1B). Though ruby was the first material in which laser action
was observed (see page 657), it is rarely used and hence serves principally as a didactic
example.

As in most materials that support laser action, stimulated emission can take place
on a variety of transitions in ruby. The energy levels pertinent to the well-known red
ruby-laser transition are displayed in Fig. 15.3-1 (which is a more fully annotated
version of Fig. 14.1-4). Operation is on the basis of a three-level pumping scheme.
Level @ is the ground state and lower laser level. Level (2), the upper laser level,
comprises a pair of closely spaced, discrete sublevels that are not resolved in Fig. 15.3-
1; the transition from the lower of these sublevels (known as Rj) to the ground state
is responsible for the ruby-red laser radiation at Ло = 694.3 nm. Level G) comprises

15.3 REPRESENTATIVE LASER AMPLIFIERS 637
two broad pump bands, centered at approximately 550 nm (green) and 400 nm (violet),
that serve to populate the upper laser level via rapid decay. These absorption bands are
responsible for the reddish color of ruby as white light passes through it. The energy
levels portrayed in Fig. 15.3-1 are designated by group-theoretical symbols rather than
by term symbols for Cr?* (Table 14.1-1) since the energy levels of transition-metal-
ion doped materials are determined in large part by the crystal field associated with the
host medium, as discussed in Sec. 14.1B. For ruby, the result is clearly a mixture of
discrete energy levels and energy bands.

Figure 15.3-1 Relevant energy levels for
Cr**: АБО; (Ruby) 4 operation of the ruby laser amplifier in the
red. The energy levels are designated by
group-theoretical symbols for reasons dis-
4F, 3 cussed in the text. The three interacting
[© energy levels are indicated by encircled num-
a [|| т bers. Level (3) comprises two broad pump
С {F, Ne bands, centered in the green and violet. These
5 ; 2 serve to populate the upper laser level (2),
2 E © |_ consisting of upper and lower sublevels В2
a | and Вл, respectively (these are not resolved
Pump 694-nm \ at the scale of the figure). Level Ф is the
laser lower laser level and ground state. Stimulated
emission on the transition from the R, line
44, @) in level @ to level (Г gives rise to the well-

0 known red laser light at A, = 694.3 nm.

As illustrated in Fig. 15.3-2, a ruby rod may be optically pumped from level (Г) to
level (3) by surrounding it with a helical flashlamp. A more efficient pumping config-
uration places the ruby rod, along with a linear flashlamp, at the foci of a reflecting
cylinder of elliptical cross section (Fig. 1.2-3). The flashlamp emits a pulse of white
light, a portion of which is absorbed by level (3), which is quite broad, resulting in the
excitation of a fraction of the Cr** ions to level @). These ions rapidly decay from
level (3) to level (2) with a time constant 732 of the order of ps. The excited ions remain
in level @) for a substantial period of time since the 2) transition lifetime 72; = 3
ms is relatively long (nonradiative decay is negligible so that 72; = tsp). The ruby-laser
system therefore complies with the three-level time-constant requirements dictated by
Fig. 15.2-7. The transition has a homogeneously broadened linewidth Av = 330 GHz
that arises principally from elastic electron scattering from lattice vibrations (phonons).
A number of key characteristics of the ruby-laser transition and the ruby-laser oscillator
are provided in Tables 15.3-1 and 16.3-1, respectively.

Ruby rod Flashlamp
— т Flashlamp
Input Ouput
photons photons
Capacitor Elliptical я
mirror Ruby rod
7 = Power
supply
(a) (d)
Figure 15.3-2 Ruby laser-amplifier configurations. (a) Geometry used for the first laser oscillator
built by Maiman in 1960 (see Chapter 16). (b) High-efficiency pumping geometry using a linear
flashlamp in a reflecting elliptical cylinder.

638 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS

B. Neodymium-Doped Glass

Neodymium-doped phosphate glass, a dielectric of refractive index п = 1.50, can
be manufactured in large volumes with high optical quality and excellent optical fin-
ish. Glass is isotropic and can be doped in a homogeneous fashion. Exceptionally
large Nd**+:glass amplifiers can therefore be fabricated and used to generate extremely
powerful optical pulses. Since glass has limited thermal conductivity, however, such
pulses are usually generated with low duty cycle to provide ample time for the glass to
dissipate heat between pulses.

The energy levels of a neodymium-doped phosphate-glass laser amplifier are dis-
played in Fig. 15.3-3 (this is an expanded version of Fig. 14.1-5). Levels ©), (О, and
@ of this four-level laser system represent the ground state, lower laser level, and upper
laser level, respectively. Stimulated emission occurs on the (2)—(Т) laser transition, at
Xo = 1.053 um in the near infrared. The energy levels are designated by means of
term symbols for the Nd?+ ion (Table 14.1-1), as discussed in Sec. 14.1B. Level @)
comprises four pump bands, each about 30 nm wide and centered near 805 nm (near
infrared), 745 nm (red), 585 nm (yellow), and 520 nm (green). The spectral profile of
a Xe flashlamp suitable for pumping this amplifier is also shown in Fig. 15.3-3.

3.0 3.0
Flashlamp Nd**: Glass
2.5 2.5
= 2.0 (©) >) 2.0 =
© ©
zs 15 ‘pS 15 eb
a @ Е
10 10
Pump 1.053-ит
laser
0.5 0.5 1.0” 0.5
Relative spectral © т ‘1 iO |
о intensity hy, a о
Figure 15.3-3 Right: Relevant energy levels for a neodymium-doped phosphate-glass four-level
laser amplifier that operates at 1.053 jum on the 4F'3/ — “Iy1,2 transition. Level @ comprises four
pump bands (centered in the near infrared, red, yellow, and green) that serve to populate the upper
laser level @. The lower laser level and ground state are denoted () and ©), respectively. The
energy levels are labeled with Nd**+-ion term symbols. Left: Spectral profile of the emission from
a broadband Xe flashlamp suitable for pumping this amplifier.

The neodymium-doped glass laser amplifier operates in the following way. The
absorption of flashlamp light by the four pump bands excites ions from level ©)
to level (0). These excited ions decay rapidly (time constant 732) and populate the
metastable upper laser level @), which has a relatively long lifetime (t;, = 370 sus).
Stimulated emission on the @)—>() transition provides laser amplification at А, =
1.053 wm. Level (Г) has a short lifetime (7; = 300 ps) and lies at an energy = 0.24 eV
above the ground state; because this is substantially larger than the thermal energy at
room temperature, kT’ = 0.026 eV, the thermal population in the lower laser level is
negligible. These features comport with the time-constant requirements specified in
Fig. 15.2-6 for a four-level system. The @)—>( laser transition is inhomogeneously
broadened as a result of the amorphous nature of the glass, which presents a different
environment at each ionic location. The sublevels in the manifolds are thus smeared
into bands, as discussed in connection with Fig. 14.1-6; this gives rise to a large
room-temperature linewidth of Av ~ 7 THz (see Tables 15.3-1 and 16.3-1).

15.3 REPRESENTATIVE LASER AMPLIFIERS 639
тии |
EXAMPLE 15.3-1. High-Power Neodymium-Doped Glass Laser Amplifiers а the МЕ.
The neodymium-doped glass laser amplifier plays a central role at the National Ignition Facility
(NIF), located at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) in Livermore, California.
Such amplifiers are widely used in experiments designed to achieve controlled thermonuclear fusion
in an encapsulated fuel target since they are capable of generating optical pulses with enormous
energies and peak powers. The NIF system marshals thousands of such amplifiers in a facility that
occupies a ten-story building the size of a sports stadium.

The optical configuration at the NIF takes the form of a master-oscillator power-amplifier (MOPA)
(Sec. 16.3B). The initial optical pulse is provided by a highly stable diode-pumped Yb**-doped fiber
master-oscillator (seed laser) that generates а 1-nJ pulse with a duration of + 5 ns. In a simplified
description, this pulse is split and sent via optical fibers to 48 laser preamplifiers that boost the overall
pulse energy to 10 J. At the same time, the spatial profiles of the beams are reshaped so they assume
18 mm x 18 mm square cross sections, which enables the individual glass amplifiers to be tightly
packed into compact configurations. Each of these 48 beams is then split into four beams, resulting in
192 main beamlines. Each beamline is endowed with a power amplifier and a main amplifier, through
which the pulse makes four roundtrips.

The Nd*+-doped phosphate-glass laser amplifiers used in the 192 main NIF beamlines have the
energy-level diagram, and use flashlamps with the spectral profile, illustrated in Fig. 15.3-3. There
are four clusters of such laser amplifiers, each consisting of 6 amplifier bundles; each bundle in
turn contains 8 amplifying laser-glass plates stacked inside a flashlamp-pumped cavity, as illustrated
in Fig. 15.3-4. Each of the 192 beamlines contains 16 separate amplification stages, so the overall
system contains 3072 phosphate-glass laser-amplifier plates. The plates are rectangular, rather than
square, since they are mounted at the Brewster angle to the direction of beam propagation to minimize
Fresnel reflection and maximize flashlamp coupling. The laser amplifiers boost the pulse energy in
each of the 192 beams to 20 kJ, so that the pulse energy is 4 MJ for the combined beam. For a 4-ns
duration pulse, this corresponds to a peak power of 1 PW. The overall amplification provided by this
exceptional MOPA is thus G = 4 x 107. The optical arrangement of the system is such that the
distance traveled by each optical pulse from the seed laser to the target is 1.5 km, entailing a travel
time of 5 us. The beam can be fired several times per day without creating undue heating.

a =“ arrays —,
7 ©
| e о ©
| | ° = bY
om | e ® e
m „ Г]
| © e ©
! e e e
| Ш + ® ® ®
Nd**: Glass slab
(a) (b)
Figure 15.3-4 (a) A bundle of amplifiers comprises eight laser-glass plates stacked inside a
flashlamp-pumped cavity at the National Ignition Facility (NIF) at LLNL. Each plate, which is made
of specially formulated phosphate laser glass with a neodymium doping level = 2 mol% (Schott
LG-770 or Hoya LHG-8), measures 3.4 cm x 46 cm x 81 cm and weighs 42 kg. The height of
the eight-amplifier bundle is = 2 т. Six such bundles make up a cluster, and four clusters comprise
the 192 individual beamlines at the NIF. Each beamline in turn contains 16 separate amplification
stages, so the overall system contains 3072 glass laser-amplifier plates. The purplish color of the
glass, when illuminated by white light and viewed in transmission, is a result of the red, yellow, and
green absorption bands of the neodymium-doped phosphate glass portrayed in Fig. 15.3-3. (b) Top
view of the linear flashlamps and amplifying Nd**:glass laser plates in a bundle. The system contains
7 680 flashlamps.
ини |

640 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS

Laser-diode in-band pumping. The Nd**-doped glass laser amplifiers considered
in Example 15.3-1 can be pumped with far greater efficiency by replacing the flash-
lamps with laser-diode arrays, which efficiently convert electrical power to optical
power. Together with the substantially reduced quantum defect associated with laser-
diode pumping, this gives rise to a factor of 20 improvement in the overall efficiency
of amplifier operation. The net result is a substantial decrease in heating, which in turn
permits operation at a far higher repetition rate. An example of laser-diode in-band
pumping is provided by the HAPLS petawatt laser system considered in Example 23.2-
3. The power-amplifier portion of the pump laser for HAPLS contains a collection
of neodymium-doped, phosphate-glass, laser-amplifier slabs similar to those used at
the NIF. The slabs are pumped by AlGaAs laser-diode arrays that deliver high-power
optical pulses at a repetition rate of 10 pulses/s. In-band pumping at 888 nm on the
‘To /2 > ЧЕ /2 М№а3+ transition results in the ions in the lower manifold being directly
pumped into the upper manifold. In-band pumping is suitable even though the dis-
crete sublevels within the manifolds are smeared into bands for this inhomogeneously
broadened medium.

C. Erbium-Doped Silica Fiber

Rare-earth-doped fiber amplifiers. Optical fiber amplifiers (OFAs) are useful
devices that offer the concomitant advantages of optical amplification and single-mode
guided-wave confinement. In rare-earth-doped fiber amplifiers (REFAs), both the
signal and pump are introduced into a doped glass fiber. The pump excites the ions to a
higher energy level, usually via quasi-three-level or in-band pumping, thereby enabling
signal amplification via downward stimulated-emission transitions. Active rare-earth
ions typically incorporated in REFAs include Er?+, Yb**+, Tm?+, Nd**, Pr?+, and
Ho?*. Since the fiber must be transparent in the wavelength range of interest, a variety
of glasses are used: e.g., silicates, phosphates, fluorides, germanates, tellurites, and
chalcogenides (Sec. 10.5). Along with the active ion, the composition of the glass plays
a contributing role in determining the absorption and emission transition cross sections,
transition bandwidth, metastable-state lifetimes, maximum attainable dopant concen-
trations, fiber nonlinearities, and refractive index of the laser medium. REFAs usually
operate in the near infrared and make use of silicate-based fibers because of their
superior optical and mechanical properties. In particular, doped silica glasses, such
as phosphosilicates, germanosilicates, and aluminosilicates, facilitate energy transfer
and accommodate higher dopant concentrations than pure silica glass. Strong optical
confinement and long fiber lengths endow REFAs with many salutary features.

REFA pumping configurations. Pumping may be implemented by longitudinally
coupling light into the amplifying fiber, usually via dichroic couplers. As illustrated in
Fig. 15.3-5, the pump light may be injected: (a) in the same direction as the signal
(the forward direction); (b) in the opposite direction from the signal (the backward
direction); or (c) in both directions (bidirectionally).

Gain fiber Gain fiber Gain fiber
G7Pump Pump, > G7Pump Pump @)
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 15.3-5 Longitudinal pumping of a rare-earth-doped fiber amplifier. The pumping may be
(a) in the forward direction; (b) in the backward direction; ог (с) bidirectional. Erbium-doped silica-
fiber amplifiers are often pumped by fiber-coupled, strained-layer, InGaAs laser-diode arrays operated
at A, = 980 nm. Similar pumping schemes are used for Raman fiber amplifiers (Sec. 15.3D).

15.3 REPRESENTATIVE LASER AMPLIFIERS 641
Amplified spontaneous emission (ASE), a fundamental source of noise in optical am-
plifiers (Sec. 15.5), plays an important role in determining the optimal pumping con-
figuration; if ASE is negligible, the direction of pumping is immaterial. In the presence
of substantial ASE losses in quasi-three-level fiber amplifiers, analysis reveals that
backward pumping can reduce these losses and increase amplifier efficiency. ASE can
also be diminished by making use of a cascade of fiber amplifiers and inserting filters
between successive stages to reduce the ASE. Nevertheless, the advantage of backward
over forward pumping diminishes as the signal power increases to a level where gain
saturation sets in. If the criterion of importance is low-noise operation, rather than high
efficiency, forward pumping is often the optimal choice.

Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers. Though rare-earth-doped fiber amplifiers find
application in many contexts, their most important use is in optical fiber communica-
tion systems. The Er?+ ion exhibits a broad laser transition near A, = 1550 nm that
fortuitously falls in the wavelength region of minimum loss for silica optical fibers
(Fig. 10.3-2). Since these fibers underlie optical fiber communications, erbium-doped
fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) find extensive use in these systems (Sec. 25.1C). EDFAs
exhibit many desirable properties, such as high gain, high output power, high efficiency,
broad bandwidth, low insertion loss, low noise, and polarization insensitivity.

As illustrated in Fig. 15.3-6, the 980-nm-pumped Er°*: silica-fiber amplifier oper-
ates on the 4/13 /2 —> Т15/2 transition at a wavelength in the vicinity of A, = 1550
nm. It behaves as a quasi-three-level system at T = 300° K and as a four-level
system when cooled to Т = 77° К, in which case the thermal population in the
lower manifold is reduced. Several key parameters related to this transition, and to
the laser oscillator that makes use of it, are summarized in Tables 15.3-1 and 16.3-
1, respectively. Appealing features of this laser transition include a long excited-state
spontaneous lifetime (¢,, == 10 ms), the absence of intermediate energy levels between
the excited and ground states, and the absence of excited-state absorption. Since Er?*
is a lanthanide-metal ion (Table 14.1-1), the host in which the ions are embedded plays
a limited role in determining the energies of the manifolds, as explained in Sec. 14.1B.
The broadening is a mixture of homogeneous (phonon-mediated) and inhomogeneous
(arising from local field variations in the glass). Ytterbium is usually added to erbium as
aco-dopant since the larger cross section of Yb?* results in more efficient absorption of
the pump photons at 980 nm; the energy is then transferred to the Er** ions, elevating
them to the “J, / level as if they had directly absorbed the pump photons. The role of
ytterbium in this context is analogous to the role of He in the He—Ne laser (Fig. 14.1-2).

2.0
Er**: Silica fiber
Figure 15.3-6 Schematic of Ех": silica-fiber
1.5 energy-level manifolds for the “13/2 — “1152 laser
4y transition near 1550 nm. When pumped at 980 nm,
> 12 this laser amplifier behaves as a quasi-three-level
nd @ < system at room temperature; the three interacting
2 10 energy levels are indicated by encircled numbers.
я {Tsp Laser amplification can also be implemented on
© this transition via in-band pumping at 1480 nm.
Pump Operation as a four-level system is also possible
1.55-m 0.5 оп the “1/2 > WEEE) transition, at a wavelength
laser in the vicinity of 2.9 zm.
„Фо
0

EDFAs can exhibit gains in excess of 50 dB with tens of mW of pump power. Аз

a specific example, a gain of = 30 dB is obtained by launching = 5 mW of pump

642 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS

power at 980 nm into a roughly 50-m length of silica fiber containing = 300 ppm (by
weight) of Ет2Оз. The highest gain efficiencies hover at about = 10 dB/mW. Signal
output powers in excess of 100 W can be generated since the output power increases in
proportion to the pump power. The available bandwidth is АЛ = 40 nm, corresponding
to Av & 5.3 THz, which accommodates the С (conventional) telecommunications
band that extends from 1530 to 1565 nm (Fig. 25.1-2). The L (long) telecommuni-
cations band, which stretches from 1565 to 1625 nm, can also be accommodated by
choosing different optimization parameters for the EDFA. The large gain—bandwidth
product offered by these amplifiers makes them ideal for use in wavelength-division
multiplexing (WDM) systems (Sec. 25.3C). The 37% quantum defect [see (15.2-32)]
associated with the quasi-three-level pumping scheme portrayed in Fig. 15.3-6 can
be reduced by making use of in-band pumping at 1480 nm on the “I)3/. — “5/2
laser transition. Pumping can then be implemented by using InGaAsP laser diodes or
a Raman fiber laser (Sec. 16.3C). High-power EDFAs can be simultaneously pumped
at 980 and 1480 nm.

The introduction of feedback readily converts fiber amplification into oscillation, as
discussed in Sec. 16.3B. When the pump power is high, as is often the case in fiber laser
oscillators, double-clad fiber configurations are usually used to avoid deleterious
nonlinear optical effects in the fiber core (Fig. 16.3-4).

Thulium- and praseodymium-doped fiber amplifiers. Other rare-earth-doped
fiber amplifiers useful for optical fiber communications include Tm*+-doped multi-
component-silicate-glass REFAs operating in the 1460-1530-пт S (short) telecom-
munications band and Pr?+ -doped REFAs operating in the 1300-nm О (original) band.
However, neither of these REFAs offer the exceptional gain and efficiency of Er?+-
doped devices. Other classes of commonly used optical amplifiers include Raman fiber
amplifiers (RFAs), which are discussed and compared with EDFAs in Sec. 15.3D,
and semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs), which are examined in Sec. 18.2 and
compared with EDFAs in Sec. 18.2D.

Summary

The Er®*: silica-fiber amplifier is widely used for optical fiber communications

by virtue of its many salutary features:

= High gain

= High output power

= High efficiency

= Broad bandwidth

= Low insertion loss

= Low noise

= Polarization insensitivity
D. Raman Fiber Amplifiers
The class of optical fiber amplifiers (OFAs) extends beyond erbium-doped and rare-
earth-doped devices. An important version of the OFA, known as the Raman fiber
amplifier (RFA), relies on stimulated Raman scattering. The RFA thus operates on the
basis of principles other than a population inversion and stimulated emission.

As discussed in Sec. 14.5C, stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) occurs when a
pump photon of energy Вир, together with a signal photon of lower energy hv, enter
a nonlinear optical medium such as an optical fiber. The nonresonant version of the

15.3 REPRESENTATIVE LASER AMPLIFIERS 643
process is illustrated in the inset in Fig. 15.3-7; the dashed horizontal line represents a
virtual state. The signal photon stimulates the emission of a clone signal photon, which
is obtained by Stokes-shifting the pump photon by the Raman energy hv so that the
energy of the clone photon precisely matches that of the incident signal photon. The
surplus energy from the pump photon is transferred to the vibrational modes of the
glass fiber. As is clear from (22.3-15), the strength of the effect, which is embodied in
the Raman gain coefficient у; , depends on the nonlinear properties of the glass fiber.
It is proportional to the pump intensity [, = P/A, where P is the pump power and А
is the interaction area. The polarization of SRS is the same as that of the exciting field.
Е 1.0 oly lee Figure 15.3-7 Stimulated Raman scattering
3 Innn~ (SRS) is schematized in the inset. Raman gain
3 0.8 Ww we is available over a range of Stokes frequencies
2 nu ° determined by the vibrational characteristics of
3, 0.6 hy _ the medium. In germanium-doped silica fiber, the
я hy Ади peak Raman gain coefficient lies at а frequency
Е 0.4 R below that of the pump by vp = 13 THz and has а
= bandwidth Av = 12.5 THz. (Gain curve adapted
Be 0.2 from R. H. Stolen, C. Lee, and R. K. Jain, De-
2 velopment of the Stimulated Raman Spectrum in
0 a Single-Mode Silica Fibers, Journal of the Optical
0 10 20 0 40 Society of America В, vol. 1, pp. 652-657, 1984,
Stokes frequency shift vz (THz) Fig. 5.)

RFAs can be either distributed or lumped. In the distributed Raman fiber ampli-
fier, the signal and pump are both sent through the transmission fiber, which serves
as the gain medium. The lumped Raman fiber amplifier, in contrast, makes use of a
short length of highly nonlinear fiber dedicated to providing gain. The core is generally
made small to increase the pump intensity /, and thereby to reduce the length of fiber
required, which can be considerable.

Raman fiber amplifiers offer substantially broader bandwidths than EDFAs. The
bandwidth over which Raman amplification obtains is governed by the vibrational
spectrum of the glass host rather than by a transition linewidth, as in stimulated-
emission lasers. Silicate, germanate, phosphate, and borate glasses exhibit very dif-
ferent SRS spectra and magnitudes. As is evident in Fig. 15.3-7, the dominant peak
in the Raman gain coefficient for germanium-doped silica fiber is Stokes shifted from
the pump frequency by approximately vg = 13 THz, corresponding to about 100 nm
at Ло = 1550 nm. The bandwidth over which substantial Raman gain is available is
of about the same magnitude as the shift of the peak, namely Av = 12.5 THz, again
corresponding to about АЛ = 100 nm at 1550 nm. Phosphosilicate glass fibers offer
even greater Stokes shifts (Example 16.3-3).

RFA pumping can be achieved by making use of polarization-diverse laser diodes,
fiber lasers, or Raman fiber lasers, operated at a wavelength about 100 nm below that
desired for amplification (Gif the medium is germanium-doped silica fiber). As with the
EDFA, the pump may be injected in the forward direction, in the backward direction,
or bidirectionally (Fig. 15.3-5); backward pumping is generally employed since it
reduces the noise transferred from the pump to the signal. Combining multiple pumps
at different frequencies can substantially broaden the available bandwidth since the
Stokes shift is linked to the pump frequency. In principle, Raman amplification can be
employed over the entire region of fiber transparency.

Raman fiber amplifiers offer gains reaching 20 dB. The RFA gain efficiency in
germanium-doped silica fiber is = 0.02 dB/mW, which is to be compared with a gain
efficiency = 10 dB/mW for an EDFA. Hence, the pump power required for achieving

644 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS

useful levels of Raman gain in such a distributed amplifier is typically hundreds of
mW, far greater than that required for an EDFA. In lumped Raman amplifiers, pump
powers in excess of 1 W can be used. Unlike EDFAs, polarization-diverse pumping is
required since the Raman gain is maximized when the signal and pump beams have
the same polarization.

Though RFA efficiencies are substantially lower than those offered by EDFAs,
they can be measurably enhanced by combining gain and dispersion compensation
to accommodate the different frequencies of the signal and pump pulses in a single
fiber. RFAs are also sometimes used in conjunction with EDFAs; hybrid amplifiers that
make use of low-noise Raman amplification together with high-power erbium-doped
fiber amplification can accommodate larger repeater spacings and increased system
capacity, but this comes at the expense of increased electrical power consumption.
Raman fiber amplifiers are particularly useful in those telecommunications windows
where EDFAs and other REFAs are unavailable or inefficient.

Brillouin fiber amplifiers. These devices make use of stimulated Brillouin scat-
tering (SBS) [Fig. 14.5-5(d)] and behave in a manner analogous to that of Raman
fiber amplifiers, but the interaction is with acoustic rather than optical phonons. Hence,
the Brillouin frequency shift and bandwidth are orders of magnitude smaller than the
Raman frequency shift and bandwidth in the same material. In silica fibers, for example
the Brillouin shift and bandwidth are roughly 10 GHz and 100 MHz, respectively,
whereas the Raman shift and bandwidth are both of the order of 13 THz.

Summary

The Raman fiber amplifier enjoys both advantages and disadvantages in compar-

ison with the erbium-doped fiber amplifier:

Advantages of the RFA relative to the EDFA:

= Wider bandwidth

= Bandwidth extendable by use of multiple pumps

= Operation over a broad range of wavelengths

= Arbitrary fiber host

= Compatible with existing fiber links

= Lower noise

= Higher saturation power

Disadvantages of the RFA relative to the EDFA:

= Lower gain

= Greater pump power required

= Lower efficiency

= Longer fiber lengths required

= Sensitivity to signal polarization

= Stringent requirements for fiber and splice maintenance
E. Tabulation of Selected Laser Transitions
In practice, the most widely used laser amplifiers are solid-state, rare-earth-doped fiber,
and Raman fiber devices, as exemplified by the examples considered in Secs. 15.3B,
15.3C, and 15.3D, respectively. However, laser amplification can also be provided
by gases, dyes, exciplexes, ionized atoms, free-electron systems, and semiconductors.
Table 15.3-1 provides a list of the wavelengths, cross sections, spontaneous lifetimes,

15.4 AMPLIFIER NONLINEARITY 645
transition linewidths, and refractive indices for a number of representative laser transi-
tions that operate in spectral regions stretching from the infrared to the X-ray domains.
It is evident that the values of A, оо, tsp, and Av vary over a broad range.

Table 15.3-1 Characteristics of some familiar laser transitions.
Transition Transition Spontaneous Transition Refractive

Wavelength® Cross Section? Lifetime Linewidth° Index
Laser Medium Xo (nm) во (cm?) tsp Av n
Cut (Ka) 0.154 7x 1018 2fs 500THz H x1
Ne* (Ka) 1.46 1х 10716 130 fs 65 THz H x1
Cot 18.2 5 x 10-16 12 ps 1THz I x1
АтЕ Exciplex 193 3 x 10716 10 ns 10THz I #1
Art 515 3x 10-¥ 10ns 3.5GHz I x1
Rhodamine-6G dye 560-640 2х 10-16 5 ns 40 THz НЛ 1.40
Ne (He-Ne) 633 3 x 10-8 250 ns 1.5GHz I #1
Cr3+:Al5O3 (ruby) 694 2 x 10-20 3ms 330GHz H 1.76
Cr°+:BeAl,O, (alexandrite) 700-820 7x 10-71 260 jus 25 THz H 1.75
ТР":АБОЗ 700-1050 3x 10-19 3.9 ps  100THz H 1.76
Yb°*:YAG 1030 2 x 10-20 1 ms 5THz H 1.82
Nd?*:Glass (phosphate) 1053 4 x 10-20 370 из 7THz I 1.50
Nd?*:YAG 1064 3 x 10719 230 ps 150GHz H 1.82
Nd?*:YVO, 1064 3х 10-18 90 us 260 ОН? H 2.0
Cr*+ :Mg2SiO, (forsterite) 1100-1400 1x 10~- 3 из 50THz H 1.65
InGaAsP ¢ 1300-1600 2x 10—16 2.5 ns 10THz H 3.54
Er®*:Silica fiber 1550 6 x 10771 10 ms 5 THz НЛ 1.46
Cr?+:ZnS 1900-3000 1x 10718 5 ps 40 THz H 2.27
CO2 10600 3 x 10718 35 60 MHz I x1
*The free-space wavelength shown in the table represents the most commonly used transition in each laser
medium. The He-Ne gas laser system, for example, is most often used on the red-orange line at 0.633 jum, but it
is also extensively used at 0.543, 1.15, and 3.39 ила (it also has laser transitions at hundreds of other wavelengths
stretching to = 100 yum).
>The value reported is the peak of the effective emission cross section gem(V).
“Values reported for gases such as СО2 are typical for low-pressure operation (the atomic linewidth in a gas
depends on its pressure because of collision broadening, which is homogeneous). H and I indicate line broadening
dominated by homogeneous and inhomogeneous mechanisms, respectively.
4Values are for Ino.72Gao.28Aso.6Po0.4 assuming an injected carrier concentration of An = 1.8 x 1018 cm=3
(see Examples 18.2-1-18.2-3).

15.4 AMPLIFIER NONLINEARITY

A. Saturated Gain in Homogeneously Broadened Media
Gain Coefficient
The following relationships have been established in earlier sections of this chapter:
1) the gain coefficient y(v) of a laser medium depends on the population difference
N, in accordance with (15.1-4); 2) N is in turn governed by the pumping rate R, in
accordance with (15.2-15); 3) N also depends on the transition rate W;, in accordance
with (15.2-10); and 4) the probability density W; in turn depends on the radiation
photon-flux density ¢, in accordance with (15.1-1). It follows that the gain coefficient
of a laser medium is dependent on the photon-flux density to be amplified. This is the
origin of amplifier nonlinearity and gain saturation, as we now demonstrate.

646 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
Substituting (15.1-1) into (15.2-10) yields
No
М (15.4-1)
1+ Ф/Ф+ (м)
where
1 А? т.
— =, 0(v) = —— g(r), (15.4-2)
Ф(ь) 87 tsp Saturation
Photon-Flux Density
thereby providing an expression for the dependence of the population difference N on
the photon-flux density ¢. Now, substituting (15.4-1) into the expression for the gain
coefficient (15.1-4) leads directly to the saturated gain coefficient for homogeneously
broadened media:
Yow
y(v) = и (15.4-3)
+ $/ds(v) Saturated
Gain Coefficient
where
2
Yo(v) = Noo(v) = Noo gv). (15.4-4)
Ttsp Small-Signal
Gain Coefficient
The gain coefficient thus decreases as the photon-flux density ф increases, as illus-
trated in Fig. 15.4-1. Since the quantity ¢,(v) = 1/7,0(v) represents the photon-
flux density at which the gain coefficient decreases to half its maximum value, it
is called the saturation photon-flux density. When т, = tsp, the interpretation of
¢s(v) is straightforward: (15.4-2) provides that ¢,(v) tsp o(v) = 1 so that roughly
one photon is emitted during each spontaneous emission lifetime into each transition
cross-sectional area.
WwW)
YoU)

1 Figure 15.4-1 Dependence of the
normalized saturated gain coefficient
y(v)/Yo(v) on the normalized photon-
flux density ф/ф. (и). When ¢ is equal

0.5 to its saturation value ¢,(v), the gain
coefficient is reduced to half its unsat-
urated value.

0 _——

10? 101 10 _®_

ov)
ee
EXERCISE 15.4-1
Saturation Photon-Flux Density for Ruby. Determine the saturation photon-flux density, and
the corresponding saturation intensity, for the Л. = 694.3-nm ruby laser transition at и = мо. Use the
parameters provided in Table 15.3-1. Assume that 7, = 2t,,, in accordance with (15.2-28).

15.4 AMPLIFIER NONLINEARITY 647
EXERCISE 15.4-2
Spectral Broadening of a Saturated Amplifier. Consider a homogeneously broadened am-
plifying medium with a Lorentzian lineshape function of width Av [see (15.1-8)]. Show that for a
photon-flux density ¢, the amplifier gain coefficient y(v) assumes a Lorentzian lineshape function of
width
Av, = Av, 1+ _? (15.4-5)
\ es(vo) Linewidth of
Saturated Amplifier
This demonstrates that gain saturation is accompanied by an increase in bandwidth, corresponding to
reduced frequency selectivity, as illustrated in Fig. 15.4-2.
Gai
coefficient
| ль Figure 15.4-2 Gain coefficient re-
duction and bandwidth increase result-
Saturated gain ing from saturation when ф = 2¢,(v%).
coefficient
\ Ди,

и -
ee
Gain
Having determined the effect of saturation on the gain coefficient (gain per unit length),
we embark on a determination of the behavior of the saturated gain for a homo-
geneously broadened laser amplifier of length d [Fig. 15.4-3(a)]. For simplicity, we
suppress the frequency dependencies of y(v’) and ф, (и) and write y and @, instead.

If the photon-flux density at position z is (z), then in accordance with (15.4-3) the
gain coefficient at that position is also a function of z. We know from (15.1-3) that
the incremental increase in photon-flux density at the position z is dé = уф dz, which
leads to the differential equation

4
de = _ Yo? _ . (15.4-6)
dz 1+9/9;
Rewriting this equation as (1/ф + 1/ф,) dé = yo dz, and integrating, we obtain
(=) _ (2) — $(0)
In —~ 4+ ————— =. (15.4-7)
$(0) ds
The relation between the photon-flux densities at the input and output, (0) and ¢(d),
respectively, is therefore
(In(Y) + Y] = [In(X) + X] + yod, (15.4-8)
where X = 9(0)/ф; and У = ¢(d)/¢, are the input and output photon-flux densities
normalized to the saturation photon-flux density, respectively.

It is useful to examine the solution for the gain G = ¢(d)/¢(0) = Y/X in two

limiting cases:

648 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
1. If both X and Y are much smaller than unity (i.e., the photon-flux densities are
much smaller than the saturation photon-flux density), then X and У are negligi-
ble in comparison with In(X ) and щ(У), whereupon we obtain the approximate
solution In(Y) = In(X) + yod, from which
У = X exp(yod). (15.4-9)
In this case the relation between Y and X is linear, and the gain G = У/Х =
exp(Yod) [leftmost dashed curve in Fig. 15.4-3(b)]. This accords with (15.1-7),
which was obtained under the small-signal approximation, valid when the gain
coefficient is independent of the photon-flux density, 1.е., у = Yo.

2. When X > 1, we can neglect In(X) in comparison with X and In(Y) in

comparison with Y in (15.4-8), whereupon

YxX-+yod (15.4-10)
which, with the help of (15.4-2) and (15.4-4), yields

Nod
= (0) + ——. (15.4-11)
Ts

Under these heavily saturated conditions, the atoms of the medium are “busy”
emitting a constant photon-flux density Моа/ть. Incoming input photons there-
fore simply leak through to the output, augmented by a constant photon-flux
density that is independent of the amplifier input [short dashed curve at right in
Fig. 15.4-3(6)].

For intermediate values of X and Y, (15.4-8) must be solved numerically. A plot
of the solution is shown as the solid curve in Fig. 15.4-3(6). The linear input-output
relationship obtained for Х < 1, and the saturated relationship for X >> 1, are evident
as limiting cases of the numerical solution. The gain G = Y/X for yod = 2 is plotted
in Fig. 15.4-3(c). It achieves its maximum value exp(Yod) for small values of the input
photon-flux density (Х < 1), and decreases toward unity as X — со.

12 ---------------- exp(YoA)
5 [= xexptyed) 5°
Amplifier Sst 3 5
Input р Output пн I And э 4
84 7 их vex °›
а 7 a | |--------------------
0 Sn 0
0 2 4 6 0.01 0.1 1 10
Input X = 4(0)/¢, Input X = @(0)/¢,
(a) (b) ©
Figure 15.4-3 (a) A nonlinear (saturated) amplifier. (5) Relation between the normalized output
photon-flux density У = ¢(d)/, and the normalized input photon-flux density Х = $(0)/ф,. For
Х <1, the ваш G = Y/X = exp(yod). For X >> 1, we obtain Y = X + yod. The numerical
solution for (15.4-8) is indicated by the solid curve. (c) Gain as a function of the input normalized
photon-flux density X for a saturated amplifier of length d with yod = 2.

15.4 AMPLIFIER NONLINEARITY 649
Saturable Absorbers
If the gain coefficient Yo is negative, i.e., if the population difference is normal rather
than inverted (No < 0), the medium provides attenuation rather than amplification. The
attenuation coefficient a(v) = —y(v) then also suffers from saturation, in accordance
with the relation a(v) = ao(v)/[1 + ¢/¢s(v)], which is analogous to (15.4-3). This
indicates that there is less absorption for large values of the photon-flux density. A
material that exhibits this property is called a saturable absorber.

The relation between the output and input photon-flux densities, Ф( 4) and (0),
respectively, for an absorber of length d is governed by (15.4-8) with negative yo. The
overall transmittance of the absorber У/Х = ¢(d)/@(0) is presented as a function of
X = 9(0) /6. as the solid curve in Fig. 15.4-4. The transmittance increases with in-
creasing $(0), ultimately reaching a limiting value of unity. This effect occurs because
the population difference N — 0, so that there is no net absorption.

5 08
=
s
5 06
И
Input Saturable absorber Output я
— — = 04
“а Е о? ===------------ exp(Y¥od)
0.1 1 10
Input X = $(0)/$,
Figure 15.4-4 The transmittance of a saturable absorber У/Х = $(d)/(0) versus the normalized
photon-flux density Х = $(0)/@,, for yod = —2. The transmittance increases with increasing input
photon-flux density.
*B. Saturated Gain in Inhomogeneously Broadened Media
Gain Coefficient
An inhomogeneously broadened medium comprises a collection of atoms containing
subsets thereof with different properties. As discussed in Sec. 14.3D, the subset of
atoms labeled В has a homogeneously broadened lineshape function gg(v). The overall
inhomogeneous average lineshape function of the medium is described by 9(и) =
(ga(v)), where (-) represents an average with respect to В. Because the small-signal
gain coefficient Yo(v/) is proportional to g(v), as provided in (15.4-4), different subsets
В of atoms have different gain coefficients yog(v). The average small-signal gain
coefficient is therefore
2
у = No>—— GV). 15.4-12
Yo(v) = No St gv) ( )

Solving for the saturated gain coefficient is more subtle, however. This is because
the saturation photon-flux density ¢,(v), which is inversely proportional to g(v) as
provided in (15.4-2), is itself dependent on the subset of atoms В. An average gain
coefficient may be defined by using (15.4-2) and (15.4-3),

y(v) = (ya(v)), (15.4-13)

650 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
where
_ __Yos(v)
ув =
1+ Ф/ф-в()
9в(и)
= b —. 15.4-14

1+ da?ga(v)
with b = No(A?/87tsp) and а? = (A?/87)(7;/tsp). Evaluating the average of (15.4-
14) requires care because the average of a ratio is not equal to the ratio of the averages.
Doppler-Broadened Medium
Though all of the atoms in a Doppler-broadened medium share a lineshape function
g(v) of identical shape, the center frequency of the subset В is shifted by an amount
Vg proportional to the velocity vg of the subset. If g(v) is Lorentzian with width Av,
(15.1-8) provides g(v) = (Av /2m)/[(v — vp)? + (Av/2)?] and gg(v) = g(v — vg).
Substituting gg(v) into (15.4-14) provides

b (Av /27)
= 15.4-15
where
Av, = Av, /1 + —2— (15.4-16)
$з(м)

and

2a? Ат. 2

—1 = — = os
$» (vo) пДи = 8m tsp TAV
А? т,
= —— . 15.4-17

87 tsp g(v0) ( )
Equation (15.4-16) was obtained for the homogeneously broadened saturated amplifier
considered in Exercise 15.4-2 [see (15.4-5)]. It is evident that the subset of atoms with
velocity vg has a saturated gain coefficient yg(v) with a Lorentzian shape of width Av,
that increases as the photon-flux density becomes larger.

The average of yg(v) in (15.4-13) is readily calculated for a Doppler-broadened
medium since the shifts vg follow a zero-mean Gaussian probability density function
p(vg) = (2т0р) \? exp(—v3/205), with standard deviation оь (Exercise 14.3-2).
Thus, У(и) = (ya(v)) is given by

(к) = ] Ye(V) p(vg) ив. (15.4-18)
If p (vg) is much broader than yg(v) (i-e., the Doppler broadening is much wider than
Av;), we may regard the broad function p(vg) as constant and remove it from the
integral when evaluating Y(vo). Setting и = мо and vg = 0 in the exponential provides
bp(0 у
¥(vy) = PO) _ =. __Yo___. (15.4-19)
^/1- 2Фа?/лАк /14 o/¢5(v)

15.5 AMPLIFIERNOISE 651
where the average small-signal gain coefficient Ур is
_ № 1
Yo = № —— ——=. (15.4-20)
87tsp ^/ 2по 2
Equation (15.4-19) provides an expression for the average saturated gain coefficient
of a Doppler broadened medium at the central frequency м, as a function of the
photon-flux density ¢ at v = vp. The gain coefficient saturates as ¢ increases in accord-
ance with a square-root law. The gain coefficient in an inhomogeneously broadened
medium therefore saturates more slowly than the gain coefficient in a homogeneously
broadened medium [see (15.4-3)], as illustrated in Fig. 15.4-5.
1
Wo) Inhomogeneous
Figure 15.4-5 Comparison of gain
05 Homogeneous saturation in homogeneously and in-
° homogeneously broadened media.
0
107 10"! 1 10 17 ©
Ф;
Hole Burning
When a large flux density of monochromatic photons at frequency 1, is applied to an
inhomogeneously broadened medium, the gain saturates only for those atoms whose
lineshape functions overlap и1. Other atoms simply do not interact with the photons and
remain unsaturated. When the saturated medium is probed by a weak monochromatic
light source of varying frequency v, the profile of the gain coefficient therefore exhibits
a hole centered about 1, as illustrated in Fig. 15.4-6. This phenomenon is known as
hole burning. Since the gain coefficient yg(v) of the subset of atoms with velocity vg
has a Lorentzian shape with width Av, given by (15.4-16), it follows that the width
of the hole is Ди,. As the flux density of saturating photons at 1, increases, both the
depth and the width of the hole increase.
5
Е TW. | Figure 15.4-6 The gain coefficient
8 ` of ап inhomogeneously broadened
Е Ay, medium is locally saturated by a large
м flux density of monochromatic photons
р > at frequency 1.
и и
*15.5 AMPLIFIER NOISE
The resonant medium that provides amplification via stimulated emission also gener-
ates spontaneous emission. The light arising from the latter process, which is inde-
pendent of the input to the amplifier, represents a fundamental source of laser am-
plifier noise. Whereas the amplified signal has a specific frequency, direction, and

652 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
polarization, the noise associated with amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) is
broadband, multidirectional, and unpolarized. As a consequence, it is possible to filter
out some of this noise by following the amplifier with a narrowband optical filter, a
collection aperture, and a polarizer.

The probability density (per second) that an atom in the upper laser level sponta-

neously emits a photon of frequency between и and и + dv is (Exercise 14.3-1):
1
Ръ(и) dv = — g(v) dv. (15.5-1)
tsp
The probability density of the spontaneous emission of a photon of any frequency
is, of course, P;, = 1/tsp. If № is the atomic density in the upper energy level,
the average spontaneously emitted photon density is N2P;,(v). (The average spon-
taneously emitted power per unit volume per unit frequency is therefore hy N2P;,(v).)
The spontaneously emitted photon density is emitted uniformly in all directions and is
equally divided between the two polarizations. If the amplifier output is collected from
a solid angle dQ, as illustrated in Fig. 15.5-1, and from only one of the polarizations,
it contains only a fraction тай /4т of the spontaneously emitted photon density. Fur-
thermore, if a filter is used to limit the collected photons to a narrow frequency band
of width B centered about the amplified signal frequency v, the number of photons
added per second by spontaneous emission from an incremental volume of unit area
and length dz is €,,(v) dz, where
1 dQ
и) = №— g(v)B— 15.5-2
Sop (¥) = Nay (vB (15.5-2)
is the noise photon-flux density per unit length.
Spontaneous Filter and
photon flux polarizer

Input dQ \

Output
photon flux | ем photon flux
аллллллэ ИИ (j алллллл

Noise

photon flux
Figure 15.5-1 Spontaneous emission is a source of amplifier noise. It is broadband, radiated in all
directions, and unpolarized. Optics can be used at the output of the amplifier to limit the spontaneous
emission noise to a narrow optical band, an incremental solid angle dQ, and a single polarization.

In determining the noise photon-flux density contributed by the amplifier, the
photon-flux density per unit length should not simply be multiplied by the length of
the amplifier. This is because the spontaneous-emission noise is itself amplified by
the medium; spontaneous-emission noise generated near the input end of the amplifier
provides a greater contribution than noise generated near the output end. ASE noise
can be accommodated by modifying the differential equation governing the growth of
the photon-flux density provided in (15.1-3), so that it becomes

dp
z
Equation (15.5-3) incorporates the photon-flux density arising from both the amplified
signal and the amplified spontaneous emission noise.

READING LIST 653
ee
EXERCISE 15.5-1
Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE).

(a) Use (15.5-3) to show that, in the absence of any input signal, spontaneous emission produces a
photon-flux density at the output of an unsaturated amplifier [y(v) = yo(v)] of length d that can
be expressed as 4(d) = dap {explyo(v)d] — 1}, where $s = &p(V)/Yo(v)-

(6) Since both €,,(v) and yo(v) are proportional to g(v), dsp is independent of g(v) so that the
frequency dependence of ¢(d) is governed solely by the factor {exp[yo(v)d] — 1}. If yo(v)
is Lorentzian with width Ay, ie., Yo(v) = Yo(v)(Av/2)?/[(v — vo)? + (Av/2)?], show that
the width of the factor {exp[yo(v)d] — 1} is smaller than Av, i.e., that the amplification of
spontaneous emission is accompanied by spectral narrowing.

ee

Photon statistics after amplification. In the course of amplification, the photon-
number statistics (Sec. 13.2C) of the incoming light are altered. A coherent signal
presented to the input of the amplifier exhibits Poisson photon-number statistics, with

a variance о? equal to the mean signal photon number И. The ASE photons, on the

other hand, exhibit Bose-Einstein photon-number statistics with ?,,, = Mase + И,

which has a substantially larger variance. The photon-number statistics of the light

after amplification, comprising both signal and spontaneous-emission contributions,
exhibits a photon-number distribution intermediate between the Poisson and Возе-

Einstein distributions. If the detector counting time and area are small, and the emerg-

ing light is linearly polarized, the photon statistics at the amplifier output obey a special

case of the noncentral-negative-binomial photon-number distribution (Prob. 15.5-

3), which has a variance given by

2_ =. = = 2 _-
Of = Tg + (Mase + Иль) + 2И5Плзв- (15.5-4)

This expression contains contributions from the signal and spontaneous emission indi-

vidually, as well as a cross term that involves both.

READING LIST
Rare-Earth, Raman, and Brillouin Fiber Amplifiers
E. Garmire, Perspectives on Stimulated Brillouin Scattering, New Journal of Physics, vol. 19, 011003,
2017.
N. K. Dutta, Fiber Amplifiers and Fiber Lasers, World Scientific, 2015.
V. V. Ter-Mikirtychev, Fundamentals of Fiber Lasers and Fiber Amplifiers, Springer-Verlag, 2014.
M. Premaratne and G. P. Agrawal, Light Propagation in Gain Media: Optical Amplifiers, Cambridge
University Press, 2011.

A. Kobyakov, M. Sauer, and D. Chowdhury, Stimulated Brillouin Scattering in Optical Fibers, Ad-
vances in Optics and Photonics, vol. 2, pp. 1-59, 2010.

C. Headley and G. P. Agrawal, eds., Raman Amplification in Fiber Optical Communication Systems,
Elsevier, 2005.

М. М. Islam, ed., Raman Amplifiers for Telecommunications, Volume 1: Physical Principles,
Springer-Verlag, 2004.

М. М. Islam, ed., Raman Amplifiers for Telecommunications, Volume 2: Sub-Systems and Systems,
Springer-Verlag, 2004.

E. Desurvire, D. Bayart, B. Desthieux, and S. Bigo, Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers: Device and
System Developments, Wiley, 2002.

М. Г.Е Digonnet, ed., Rare-Earth-Doped Fiber Lasers and Amplifiers, CRC Press, 2nd ed. 2001.

654 CHAPTER 15 LASER AMPLIFIERS

P. C. Becker, N. A. Olsson, and J. R. Simpson, Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers: Fundamentals and
Technology, Academic Press, 1999.

E. Desurvire, Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers: Principles and Applications Wiley, 1994.

М. J. Digonnet, ed., Selected Papers on Rare Earth-Doped Fiber Laser Sources and Amplifiers, SPIE
Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 37), 1992.

E. Desurvire, J. R. Simpson, and P. C. Becker, High-Gain Erbium-Doped Traveling-Wave Fiber
Amplifier, Optics Letters, vol. 12, pp. 888-890, 1987.

R. J. Mears, L. Reekie, I. M. Jauncey, and D. N. Payne, Low-Noise Erbium-Doped Fibre Amplifier
Operating at 1.54 ит, Electronics Letters, vol. 23, pp. 1026-1028, 1987.

S. B. Poole, D. N. Payne, and M. E. Fermann, Fabrication of Low Loss Optical Fibers Containing
Rare Earth Ions, Electronics Letters, vol. 21, рр. 737—738, 1985.

E. P. Ippen and R. H. Stolen, Stimulated Brillouin Scattering in Optical Fibers, Applied Physics
Letters, vol. 21, pp. 539-541, 1972.

К. H. Stolen, Е. Р. Ippen, and А. В. Tynes, Raman Oscillation in Glass Optical Waveguide, Applied
Physics Letters, vol. 20, pp. 62—64, 1972.

С. J. Koester and Е. Snitzer, Amplification in a Fiber Laser, Applied Optics, vol. 3, pp. 1182-1186,
1964.

H. W. Etzel, H. W. Gandy, and R. J. Ginther, Stimulated Emission of Infrared Radiation from
Ytterbium-Activated Silicate Glass, Applied Optics, vol. 1, pp. 534-536, 1962.

С. У. Raman and К. $. Krishnan, А New Type of Secondary Radiation, Nature, vol. 121, pp. 501-502,
1928.

L. Brillouin, Diffusion de la lumiére et des rayons X par un corps transparent homogéne: Influence de
Гасцаноп thermique [Diffusion of Light and X-rays by a Transparent Homogeneous Body: The
Influence of Thermal Excitations], Annales de Physique (Paris), vol. 9, по. 17, pp. 88-122, 1922.

High-Power Pulsed Laser Amplifiers

L. Hu, D. He, H. Chen, X. Wang, T. Meng, L. Wen, J. Hu, Y. Xu, S. Li, Y. Chen, W. Chen, S. Chen,
J. Tang, and B. Wang, Research and Development of Neodymium Phosphate Laser Glass for High
Power Laser Application, Optical Materials, vol. 63, рр. 213-220, 2017.

М. Г. Spaeth et al., Description of the NIF Laser, Fusion Science and Technology, vol. 69, pp. 25—
145, 2016.

R. Betti and O. A. Hurricane, Inertial-Confinement Fusion with Lasers, Nature Physics, vol. 12,
рр. 435—448, 2016.

М. Rose, Laser Fusion, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 25, по. 9, рр. 34—41, 2014.

К. Courtland, Star Power, JEEE Spectrum, vol. 50 (4NA), рр. 26-32 & 57-58, 2013.

J. H. Campbell and T. I. Suratwala, Nd-Doped Phosphate Glasses for High-Energy/High-Peak-Power
Lasers, Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids, vol. 263/264, pp. 318-341, 2000.

Optical Amplifier Noise and Photon Statistics

A. R. Karthikeyan and H. S. Ramachandran, Convergence of Quantum and Semiclassical Models of
Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers, Journal of the Optical Society of America В, vol. 28, pp. 533-
542, 2011.

G. Kahraman and B. E. A. Saleh, Quantum-Statistical Properties of Pulse Amplification in Optical
Fibers with Gain Saturation, Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 13, рр. 1127-1134, 1995.

T. Li and М. С. Teich, Photon Point Process for Traveling-Wave Laser Amplifiers, IEEE Journal of
Quantum Electronics, vol. 29, рр. 2568—2578, 1993.

P. Diament and M. C. Teich, Evolution of the Statistical Properties of Photons Passed Through a
Traveling-Wave Laser Amplifier, JEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. 28, рр. 1324—1334,
1992.

E. Desurvire, Analysis of Noise Figure Spectral Distribution in Erbium Doped Fiber Amplifiers
Pumped Near 980 and 1480 nm, Applied Optics, vol. 29, pp. 3118—3125, 1990.

K. Shimoda, H. Takahasi, and C. H. Townes, Fluctuations in Amplification of Quanta with Applica-
tion to Maser Amplifiers, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, vol. 12, рр. 686-700, 1957.

PROBLEMS 655
PROBLEMS

15.1-2 Amplifier Gain and Rod Length. Consider a ruby laser amplifier that makes use of a 15-
cm-long rod and has a small-signal gain of 12. Neglecting the effects of gain saturation,
determine the small-signal gain of a 20-cm-long rod?

15.1-3 Laser Amplifier Gain and Population Difference. A 15-cm-long Nd**:glass rod used аз
a laser amplifier has a total small-signal gain of 10 at A, = 1.06 jum. Use the data provided
in Table 15.3-1 to determine the population difference № (Nd** ions per cm?) required to
achieve this gain.

15.1-4 Amplification of a Broadband Signal. The transition between two energy levels exhibits
a Lorentzian lineshape of central frequency v9 = 5 x 1014 with a linewidth Av = 1 THz.
The population is inverted so that the maximum gain coefficient у(м) = 0.1 cm7'. The
medium has an additional loss coefficient a, = 0.05 cm~!, which is independent of и.
Estimate the loss or gain encountered by a light wave traversing 1 cm if it has a uniform
power spectral density centered about ио with a bandwidth 2Av.

15.2-4 Two-Level Pumping System. Write the rate equations for a two-level system and demon-
strate that a steady-state population inversion cannot be achieved by using direct optical
pumping between levels (Г) and (2).

15.2-5 Two Laser Lines. Consider an atomic system with four levels: the ground state ©), (Т), @,
and (3). Two pumps are applied: one between the ground state and level (3) at a rate Rs
and the other between the ground state and level @ at a rate Rp. Population inversion can
occur between levels (3) and (Г) and/or between levels (2) and © (as in a four-level system).
Assuming that decay from level @) to level @ is not possible, and that decay from levels @)
and (2) to the ground state are negligible, write the rate equations for levels (О, @, and (3)
in terms of the lifetimes ти, 731, and 721. Determine the steady-state population densities
N,, №, and Nz and examine the possibility of simultaneous population inversions between
levels G) and (Г), and between levels (2) and (D. Show that the presence of radiation at the
@-— transition reduces the population difference for the @)—(© transition.

15.4-3 Significance of the Saturation Photon-Flux Density. In the general two-level atomic
system of Fig. 15.2-3, то represents the lifetime of level @ in the absence of stimulated
emission. In the presence of stimulated emission, the rate of decay from level @ increases
and the effective lifetime decreases. Find the photon-flux density ¢ at which the lifetime
decreases to half its value. How is that photon-flux density related to the saturation photon-
flux density ¢,?

15.4-4 Saturation Optical Intensity. Determine the saturation photon-flux density (vo) and the
corresponding saturation optical intensity Г, (ро), for the homogeneously broadened ruby
and Nd:YAG laser transitions by making use of the parameters provided in Table 15.3-1.

15.4-5 Growth of the Photon-Flux Density in a Saturated Laser Amplifier. The growth of the
photon-flux density @(z) in a saturated laser amplifier is described by (15.4-7). Plot ф(=) /ф,
versus Yoz for Ф(0) /ф, = 0.05. Identify the onset of saturation in this amplifier.

15.4-6 Resonant Absorption of a Medium in Thermal Equilibrium. A unity refractive-index
medium of volume 1 cm® contains N, = 1023 atoms in thermal equilibrium. The ground
state is energy level (Г); level @ has energy 2.48 eV above the ground state (A, = 0.5 ила).
The transition between these two levels is characterized by a spontaneous lifetime t,, =
1 ms, and a Lorentzian lineshape of width Ди = 1 GHz. Consider two temperatures, Ту
and То, such that kT, = 0.026 eV and kT> = 0.26 eV.

(a) Determine the populations N; and №.

(b) Determine the number of photons emitted spontaneously every second.

(с) Determine the attenuation coefficient of this medium at Л. = 0.5 ита assuming that the
incident photon flux is small.

(d) Sketch the dependence of the attenuation coefficient on frequency, indicating the im-
portant parameters on the sketch.

(e) Find the value of photon-fiux density at which the attenuation coefficient decreases by
a factor of 2 (1.е., the saturation photon-flux density).

(Е) Sketch the dependence of the transmitted photon-flux density ¢(d) on the incident
photon-flux density ¢(0) for и = vp and и = vy + Av when ¢(0)/¢, < 1.

656 — CHAPTER15 LASER AMPLIFIERS
15.4-7 Gain in a Saturated Amplifying Medium. Consider a homogeneously broadened laser
amplifying medium of length d = 10 cm and assume that the saturation photon-flux
density 6, = 4 x 1018 photons/ cm”-s. It is known that a photon-flux density at the input
$(0) = 4 x 10!° photons/cm?-s produces a photon-flux density at the output 6(d) =
4 x 1016 photons/cm?-s.
(a) Determine the small-signal gain of the system Со.
(b) Determine the small-signal gain coefficient yo.
(c) What is the photon-flux density at which the gain coefficient decreases by a factor of 5?
(d) Determine the gain coefficient for an input photon-flux density given by #(0) = 4x 101°
photons/cm?-s. Under these conditions, is the gain of the system greater than, less than,
or the same as the small-signal gain determined in (a)?

*15.5-2 Ratio of Signal Power to ASE Power. An unsaturated laser amplifier of length d and gain
coefficient Yo(v) amplifies an input signal ¢;(0) of frequency v and introduces amplified
spontaneous emission (ASE) at a rate €,,, (per unit length). The amplified signal photon-
flux density is ¢;(d) and the ASE at the output is Gasp. Sketch the dependence of the ratio
фз (4) /Флзь on the product of the amplifier gain coefficient and length, yo(v)d.

*15.5-3 Photon-Number Distribution for Amplified Coherent Light. A linearly polarized super-
position of interfering pulses of coherent and narrowband thermal light serves as a suitable
model for the light emerging from a laser amplifier. The resulting light pulses are known to
have random energy fluctuations w that obey the noncentral-chi-square probability density
function,"

plow) = = exp(—N ES) 1] AES),
WaskE WasE WaskE
provided that the measurement time and detector area are sufficiently small. Here Го denotes
the modified Bessel function of order zero, Wasp is the mean energy of the ASE, and wg is
the (constant) energy of the amplified coherent signal.
(a) Calculate the mean and variance of w.
(b) Use (13.2-27) and (13.2-28) to determine the photon-number mean fi and variance c?,
thereby confirming the validity of (15.5-4).
(c) Use (13.2-26) to show that the photon-number distribution is given by
ase Ns Tis /Tase
p(n) = (1+ йлзв)" +1 => (- 1+ =) ton (- 1+ т ,
where L, represents the Laguerre polynomial (see footnote on page 103)
In (—2) =a >. ("Нар ”
and Ng and пдзв are the mean signal and amplified-spontaneous-emission photon num-
bers, respectively. This is a special case of the noncentral-negative-binomial (NNB)
distribution.
(4) Plot p(n) for пз/п = 0, 0.5, 0.8, and 1, when и = 5, demonstrating that the ММВ
photon-number distribution provided above reduces to the Bose-Einstein distribution
for Tis /п = 0 and to the Poisson distribution for Tis /й = 1.
1 See, e.g., Т. Li and М. С. Teich, Photon Point Process for Traveling-Wave Laser Amplifiers, JEEE Journal
of Quantum Electronics, vol. 29, pp. 2568—2578, 1993.

CHAPTER
eee
LASERS
16.1 THEORY OF LASER OSCILLATION 659

A. Optical Amplification and Feedback
B. Conditions for Laser Oscillation
16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASER OUTPUT 666
A. Power
B. Spectral Distribution
C. Spatial Distribution and Polarization
D. Mode Selection
16.3 TYPES OF LASERS 680
A. Solid-State Lasers
B. Fiber Lasers
C. Raman Lasers
D. Random Lasers
E. Gas and Dye Lasers
F. X-Ray and Free-Electron Lasers
G. Tabulation of Selected Laser Characteristics
16.4 PULSED LASERS 707
A. Methods of Pulsing Lasers
*B. Analysis of Transient Effects
*C. Q-Switching
D. Mode Locking
*E. Optical Frequency Combs
sa |
Arthur L. Schawlow Theodore H. Maiman
(1921-1999) (1927-2007)
In 1958 Arthur Schawlow and Charles Townes suggested a method for extending the principle of the
maser to the optical region of the spectrum. Schawlow shared the 1981 Nobel Prize with Nicolaas
Bloembergen (pictured on p. 1015). Theodore Maiman achieved the first successful operation of a
(ruby) laser on 16 May 1960, a date commemorated as the International Day of Light.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
657

CSC
The laser is an optical oscillator. It comprises a resonant optical amplifier whose output
is fed back to the input with matching phase (Fig. 16.0-1). The oscillation process can
be initiated by the presence at the amplifier input of even a small amount of noise
that contains frequency components lying within the bandwidth of the amplifier. This
input is amplified and the output is fed back to the input, where it undergoes further
amplification. The process continues indefinitely until a large output is produced. The
increase of the signal is ultimately limited by saturation of the amplifier gain, and the
system reaches a steady state in which an output signal is created at the frequency of
the resonant amplifier.
Feedback
Amplifier . . . .
"ЛАМА Figure 16.0-1 An oscillator is an amplifier
with positive feedback.
Power
supply
Two conditions must be satisfied for oscillation to occur:
= The amplifier gain must be greater than the loss in the feedback system so that net
gain is incurred in a round trip through the feedback loop.
= The total phase shift in a single round trip must be a multiple of 27 so that the
feedback input phase matches the phase of the original input.
If these conditions are satisfied, the system becomes unstable and oscillation begins.
As the power in the oscillator grows, the amplifier gain saturates and thus falls below
its initial value. A stable condition is reached when the reduced gain is equal to the loss
(Fig. 16.0-2). The gain then just compensates the loss so that the cycle of amplification
and feedback is repeated without change and steady-state oscillation prevails.
Gain
Figure 16.0-2 If the initial amplifier gain
is greater than the loss, oscillation may begin.
Loss As the oscillator power increases, the ampli-
——_- fier saturates, causing Из gain to decrease.
A steady-state condition is reached when the
gain just equals the loss.
0 Steady-state Power
power
Because the gain and phase shift are functions of frequency, the two oscillation con-
ditions are satisfied only at one or more particular frequencies, namely the resonance
frequencies of the oscillator. The useful output is extracted by coupling a portion of the
power out of the oscillator.
In summary, an oscillator comprises:
= An amplifier with a gain-saturation mechanism.
= A feedback system.
и A frequency-selection mechanism.
= An output coupling scheme.
658

16.4 THEORY OF LASER OSCILLATION 659

The laser is an optical oscillator (Fig. 16.0-3) in which the amplifier is the pumped
active medium considered in Secs. 15.1 and 15.2. Gain saturation is a basic property
of laser amplifiers, as discussed in Sec. 15.4. Feedback is engendered by placing the
active medium in an optical resonator that reflects the light back and forth between
its mirrors, as discussed in Chapter 11. Frequency selection is jointly achieved by
the resonant amplifier and the resonator, which admits only certain modes. Output
coupling is accomplished by making one of the resonator mirrors partially transmitting.

Mirror Active medium
——>
~—~ Partially Laser
transmitting output
|< d —_ы mirror
Figure 16.0-3 A laser consists of an optical amplifier (comprising an active medium) placed
within an optical resonator. The output is extracted through a partially transmitting mirror.

Lasers have an enormous variety of forms and are used in myriad scientific and tech-
nical applications such as interferometry, spectroscopy, imaging, lithography, metrol-
ogy, communications, lidar, atomic cooling, materials processing, biology, and neu-
roscience, among others. Needless to say, they are invaluable for fundamental stud-
ies and applications in photonics, as well as in all branches of science, engineering,
and medicine. The precursor to the laser was the maser, an acronym for Microwave
Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. The maser/laser principle also
holds promise for waves other than electromagnetic radiation. The saser, for exam-
ple, is an acoustic version of the laser that emits a beam of phonons, offering Sound
Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation.

This Chapter

This chapter provides an introduction to the operation of lasers. In Sec. 16.1 the be-

havior of the laser amplifier and the laser resonator are summarized, and oscillation

conditions are derived. The properties of the light emitted by lasers, including power,

spectral distribution, spatial distribution, and polarization, are considered in Sec. 16.2.

Various types of lasers are discussed in Sec. 16.3, while Sec. 16.4 is devoted to the

operation of pulsed lasers. Laser diodes, microlasers, and nanolasers are considered in

Chapter 18 while high-power (petawatt) lasers are briefly examined in Chapter 23.
16.1 THEORY OF LASER OSCILLATION

We begin this section with a summary of the properties of the two basic components of

the laser — the resonator and the amplifier. These topics have been discussed in detail

in Chapters 11 and 15, respectively, but are reviewed here for convenience.

A. Optical Amplification and Feedback

Laser Amplification

The laser amplifier is a narrowband coherent amplifier of light. Amplification is

achieved by stimulated emission from an atomic or molecular system with a transition

660 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

whose population is inverted (i.e., the upper energy level is more populated than the
lower). The amplifier bandwidth is determined by the linewidth of the atomic transi-
tion, or by an inhomogeneous broadening mechanism such as Doppler broadening in
gas lasers.

The laser amplifier is a distributed-gain device characterized by its gain coefficient
(gain per unit length) y(v), which governs the rate at which the photon-flux density ф
(or the optical intensity Г = hy @) increases. When the photon-flux density ¢ is small,
the gain coefficient is given by

2
Yo(v) = Noa(v) = № a I): (16.1-1)
Mesp Small-Signal
Gain Coefficient
where
No = equilibrium population density difference (density of atoms in the upper en-
ergy state minus that in the lower state); No increases with increasing pump-
ing rate
o(v) = (A?/8rtsp)g(v) = transition cross section
tsp = effective spontaneous lifetime for stimulated emission
g(v) = transition lineshape function
A= Ло/п = wavelength in the medium, where n = refractive index

As the photon-flux density increases, the amplifier ultimately enters a region of non-
linear operation in which the gain saturates and decreases. The amplification process
then depletes the initial population difference No, reducing it to М = No/[1+¢/¢5(v)|
for a homogeneously broadened medium, where

¢5(v) = [t,0(v)]~! = saturation photon-flux density

Ts = saturation time constant, which depends on the decay times of the energy
levels involved; in an ideal four-level pumping scheme, т. * tsp, whereas
in an ideal three-level pumping scheme, т; = 2%
The gain coefficient of the saturated amplifier is therefore reduced to y(v) = No(v),
so that for homogeneous broadening we have
Yo(v)
y(v) = ; (16.1-2)
1+ $/¢s(v) Saturated
Gain Coefficient

The laser amplification process also introduces a phase shift. When the lineshape is
Lorentzian with linewidth Av, so that g(v) = (Av/27)/|(v — v9)? + (Av/2)?], the
amplifier phase shift per unit length becomes

и
ev) = SW). (16.1-3)
и Phase-Shift Coefficient
(Lorentzian Lineshape)

16.1 THEORY OF LASER OSCILLATION 661
This phase shift is above and beyond that introduced by the medium hosting the laser
atoms. The gain and phase-shift coefficients for an amplifier with Lorentzian lineshape
function are illustrated in Fig. 16.1-1.
Gain
coefficient
YY)
—| |< Av
Figure 16.1-1 Spectral dependence
of the gain and phase-shift coeffi-
и и cients for an optical amplifier with а
Phase-shift Lorentzian lineshape function.
coefficient
pl)
м и
Feedback and Loss: The Optical Resonator
Optical feedback is achieved by placing the active medium in an optical resonator. A
Fabry—Perot resonator, comprising two mirrors separated by a distance d, contains the
medium (refractive index n) in which the active atoms of the amplifier reside. Travel
through the medium introduces a phase shift per unit length equal to the wavenumber
2пи
k= —. (16.1-4)
с Phase-Shift Coefficient
The resonator also contributes to losses in the system. Absorption and scattering
of light in the medium introduces a distributed loss characterized by the attenuation
coefficient a, (loss per unit length). In traveling a round trip through a resonator of
length d, the photon-flux density is reduced by the factor R| Ry exp(—2a,d), where
ХФ! and Ry are the reflectances of the two mirrors. The overall loss in one round trip
can therefore be described by a total effective distributed loss coefficient a,., where
ехр(—2а..4) = ХХ ехр(—2а, а), (16.1-5)
so that
Ap = As + Am + Am2
1 | 1
Am = — Ш—
mi Od Ry (16.1-6)
Loss Coefficient
1 1 1
ата = — n—
m2 2d Ry ’
where отл and та represent the loss contributions of mirrors 1 and 2, respectively.
The contribution from both mirrors is therefore
+ 1 1 1 (16.1-7)
Am =a m2 = — n=. .1-
т mi m2 2d Ri Ro

662 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
Since a, represents the total loss of energy (or number of photons) per unit length, a,c
represents the loss of photons per second. Thus,
1
Tp = — (16.1-8)
QC
represents the photon lifetime, which decreases with increasing loss.

The resonator sustains only frequencies that correspond to a round-trip phase shift
that is a multiple of 27. For a resonator devoid of active atoms (a so-called “cold
resonator”), the round-trip phase shift is simply k2d = 2rvd/c = 42т, corresponding
to modes of frequencies

Иа = Чик, а=1,2,..., (16.1-9)
where vp = c/2d is the resonator mode spacing and с = c,/n is the speed of light
in the medium (Fig. 16.1-2). The (full width at half maximum) spectral width of these
resonator modes is

ИЕ
ov &% —, 16.1-10
F ( )
where 3 is the finesse of the resonator (Sec. 11.1А). When the resonator losses are
small and the finesse is large,
Fw = atv (16.1-11)
= —— = 20Tp Up. .1-
a,d per
— = |e

и —1 и Vy +1 и
Figure 16.1-2 Resonator modes are separated by the frequency иг = c/2d and have linewidths
би = vp/F =1/277p.

B. Conditions for Laser Oscillation
Two conditions must be satisfied for the laser to oscillate (lase). The gain condition
determines the minimum population difference, and therefore the pumping threshold,
required for lasing. The phase condition determines the frequency (or frequencies) at
which oscillation takes place.
Gain Condition: Laser Threshold
The initiation of laser oscillation requires that the small-signal gain coefficient be
greater than the loss coefficient,

Yo(v) > a,, (16.1-12)

Threshold Gain Condition

or, equivalently, that the gain be greater than the loss. In accordance with (16.1-1),
the small-signal gain coefficient yo(v) is proportional to the equilibrium population

16.1 THEORY OF LASER OSCILLATION 663
density difference No, which in turn is known from Chapter 15 to increase with the
pumping rate R. Indeed, (16.1-1) may be used to translate (16.1-12) into a condition
on the population difference, i.e., No = Yo(v)/o(v) > a,/a(v). Thus,

№ > №, (16.1-13)
where the quantity
a
N, = —~ (16.1-14)
o(v)
is called the threshold population difference. This quantity, which is proportional to
a,, determines the minimum pumping rate R, for the initiation of laser oscillation.’
Using (16.1-8), а, may alternatively be written in terms of the photon lifetime,
a, = 1/cTp, whereupon (16.1-14) takes the form
1
N, = ———~. (16.1-15)
CTp O(V)
The threshold population density difference is therefore directly proportional to a,
and inversely proportional to 7,. Higher loss (shorter photon lifetime) requires more
vigorous pumping to achieve lasing.

Finally, use of the standard formula for the transition cross section, o(v) =
(A?/87tsp)g(v), leads to yet another expression for the threshold population dif-
ference,

82 t 1
N=: (16.1-16)
MC тр g(v) Threshold
Population Difference
from which it is clear that MN; is a function of the frequency и. The threshold is lowest,
and lasing is therefore most readily achieved, at the frequency where the lineshape
function is greatest, 1.е., at its central frequency и = мо. For a Lorentzian lineshape
function, (14.3-35) provides that g(vo) = 2/7Av, so that the minimum population
difference for oscillation at the central frequency vp turns out to be
2п 2rAvt
М = Що. (16.1-17)
Ас Тр
It is directly proportional to the linewidth Av.

If, furthermore, the transition is limited by lifetime broadening with a decay time
given by tsp, Av assumes the value 1/27t,, (Sec. 14.3D), whereupon (16.1-17) sim-
plifies to 9 9

п пах

М = = =. 16.1-18
‘Net, А? ( )
This formula reveals that the minimum threshold population difference required to
achieve oscillation is a simple function of the wavelength Л and the photon lifetime
Tp. It is clear that laser oscillation becomes more difficult to achieve as the wavelength
decreases. As a numerical example, if A, = 1 um, т, = 1 ns, and the refractive index

п, = 1, we obtain М = 2.1 x 107 сш 3.

С possible, however, to achieve lasing without inversion (LWI) within the energy-level structure of a
conventional laser medium by making use of an external optical field that creates an additional path from the
lower to the upper energy level via an auxiliary energy level. Under appropriate circumstances, the presence of
the two paths can result in destructive quantum interference that reduces or eliminates absorption.

664 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
ee
EXERCISE 16.1-1

Threshold of a Ruby Laser.

(a) At the line center of the Л. = 694.3-nm transition (see Table 15.3-1), the absorption coefficient
of ruby in thermal equilibrium (1.е., without pumping) at T = 300° К is a(v) = —Yo(v%) =
0.2 cm7!. If the concentration of Cr®* ions responsible for the transition is №. = 1.58 x
1019 cm7, determine the transition cross section оо = o(v).

(b) A ruby laser makes use of a 10-cm-long ruby rod (refractive index n = 1.76) of cross-sectional
area 1 cm? and operates on this transition at А, = 694.3 nm. Both of its ends are polished
and coated so that each has a reflectance of 80%. Assuming that there are no scattering or
other extraneous losses, determine the resonator loss coefficient a, and the resonator photon
lifetime ть.

(с) As the laser pumping increases, y(v) increases from its initial thermal equilibrium value of
—0.2 cm™! and changes sign, thereby providing gain. Determine the threshold population differ-
ence №, for laser oscillation.

НИ

Phase Condition: Laser Frequencies

The second condition of oscillation requires that the phase shift imparted to a light

wave completing a round trip within the resonator must be a multiple of 27, 1.е.,

2ка + 2p(v)d = 2nq, q=1,2,.... (16.1-19)

If the contribution arising from the active laser atoms [2ф(к)а] is small, then divid-

ing (16.1-19) by 2d reduces to the cold-resonator result obtained earlier, и = vg =

q(c/2d). In the presence of the active medium, when 2y(v)d does contribute, the
solution of (16.1-19) gives rise to a set of oscillation frequencies 1, that are slightly
displaced from the cold-resonator frequencies v,. It turns out that the cold-resonator
modal frequencies are all pulled slightly toward the central frequency of the atomic
transition, as shown below.

*Frequency Pulling

Using the relation К = 27v/c, and the phase-shift coefficient for the Lorentzian

lineshape function provided in (16.1-3), the phase-shift condition (16.1-19) provides

си
y+ ——— y(v) = 4. 16.1-20
This equation can be solved for the oscillation frequency и = и, that corresponds to
each cold-resonator mode v,. Because the equation is nonlinear, a graphical solution
is useful. The left-hand side of (16.1-20), designated w(v), is plotted in Fig. 16.1-3 as
the sum of a straight line, representing v, plus the Lorentzian phase-shift coefficient
shown schematically in Fig. 16.1-1. The value of v = и, that renders ~(v) = № is
graphically determined. It is apparent from the figure that the cold-resonator modes v7,

are always frequency-pulled toward the central frequency of the resonant medium 1.
An approximate analytical solution of (16.1-20) can also be obtained. We write

(16.1-20) in the form

№ Wy) (16.1-21)
Vv =Vyg- —— . .1-
Ч Qn Av у
When и = и, А Vv, Фе second term on the right-hand side of (16.1-21) is small so
that и may be replaced with и without much loss of accuracy. This leads to
! сии

16.1 THEORY OF LASER OSCILLATION 665
02)
“%q Оо, =>”
и р
д: Central frequency of
и их, ! г atomic transition
> 1 !
i hoi Oscillation
ty | Ги frequency
| Cold-resonator
ot у Е
Vol Vil % и, Vy и
Figure 16.1-3 The left-hand side of (16.1-20), w(v), plotted as a function of и. The frequency и
for which (и) = vq is the solution of (16.1-20). Each “cold” resonator frequency и. corresponds
10 a “hot” resonator frequency v/,, which is shifted in the direction of the atomic-resonance central
frequency 1%.
which is an explicit expression for the oscillation frequency и as a function of the cold-
resonator frequency v7. Furthermore, under steady-state conditions, the gain equals the
loss so that y(v,) = a, = л/а = (2n/c)dv, where ди is the spectral width of the
cold resonator modes. Substituting this relation into (16.1-22) then leads to
би
Ui, © — (Vg — и). (16.1-23)
и Laser Frequencies
The cold-resonator frequency 1, is thus seen to be pulled toward the atomic resonance
frequency мо by a fraction ди/Ди of its original distance from the central frequency
(vq — Vo), as illustrated in Fig. 16.1-4. The sharper the resonator mode (the smaller
the value of dv), the less significant is the pulling effect. In contrast, the narrower the
atomic resonance linewidth (the smaller the value of Av), the more effective is the
pulling.
YW)
JS 7“
Amplifier
: gain coefficient
% с и
| ея
jv Cold-resonator
modes
¥ yoy y
Laser oscillation
р modes
Vi и, и
Figure 16.1-4 The laser oscillation modes fall near the cold-resonator modes; they are pulled
slightly toward the atomic-resonance central frequency 1. The illustration is not to scale and the
degree of pulling is exaggerated for clarity.

666 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASER OUTPUT
A. Power
Internal Photon-Flux Density
A laser pumped above the threshold (№ > N;) exhibits a small-signal gain coefficient
Yo(v) that is greater than the loss coefficient a, as indicated in (16.1-12). Laser oscil-
lation may then begin, provided that the phase condition (16.1-19) is satisfied. As the
photon-flux density ф inside the resonator increases (Fig. 16.2-1), the gain coefficient
y(v) begins to decrease in accordance with (16.1-2) for a homogeneously broadened
medium. As long as the gain coefficient remains larger than the loss coefficient, the
photon flux continues to grow.
phaser
a “men Figure 16.2-1 Determination of the
Yo) Sure Steady steady-state laser photon-flux density $.
ve ate 7 At the time of laser turn-on, ф = 0 so that
TNE ———— a, Loss coefficient y(v) = yYo(v). As the oscillation builds up
in time, the increase in ф causes y(v) to
¥(v) Gain coefficient decrease through gain saturation. When y
та reaches a,, the photon-flux density ceases
: its growth and steady-state conditions are
achieved. The smaller the loss, the greater
0 the value of ¢.
0.19.0) Т 9:0) 100%) Photon-flux
@ density
Finally, when the saturated gain coefficient becomes equal to the loss coefficient
(or equivalently № = №), the photon flux ceases its growth and the oscillation reaches
steady-state conditions. The result is gain clamping at the value of the loss. The steady-
state laser internal photon-flux density is therefore determined by equating the large-
signal (saturated) gain coefficient to the loss coefficient, 1.е., Yo(v)/{1 + 6/¢s(v)] =
a,, which provides
Yo(v)
0, Yo(v ) < Ap.
Equation (16.2-1) represents the steady-state photon-flux density arising from laser
action. This is the mean number of photons per second crossing a unit area in both
directions, since photons traveling in both directions contribute to the saturation pro-
cess. The photon-flux density for photons traveling in a single direction is therefore
ф/2. Spontaneous emission has been neglected in this simplified treatment. Of course,
(16.2-1) represents the mean photon-flux density; there are random fluctuations about
this mean as discussed in Sec. 13.2.
Since Yo(v) = No a(v) and a, = М o(v), (16.2-1) may be written in the form
No
v){—-1 No > М
oa 9% ›(м ). oo (16.2-2)
0, No < Nx. Steady-State Internal
= Photon-Flux Density

16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASER OUTPUT 667
Below threshold, the laser photon-flux density is zero; any increase in the pumping
rate is manifested as an increase in the spontaneous-emission photon flux, but there
is no sustained oscillation. Above threshold, the steady-state internal laser photon-flux
density is directly proportional to the initial population difference No, and therefore
increases with the pumping rate R [see (15.2-13) and (15.2-27)]. If No is twice the
threshold value М№,, the photon-flux density is precisely equal to the saturation value
фз (и), which is the photon-flux density at which the gain coefficient decreases to half
its maximum value. Both the population difference N and Фе photon-flux density ф
are shown as functions Np in Fig. 16.2-2.
N ф
>
58 gz
5.0 q Ах :
Ss | = :
aS
0 0
м. Ny 0 м. 2м №
—> Pumping rate —»> Pumping rate
Figure 16.2-2 Steady-state values of the population difference N, and the laser internal photon-
flux density ¢, as functions of No (the population difference in the absence of radiation; No increases
with the pumping rate К). Laser oscillation occurs when No exceeds N;; the steady-state value of
М then saturates, clamping at the value NM; [just as yo(v) is clamped at a,.]. Above threshold, ¢ is
proportional to No — №.
Output Photon-Flux Density
Only a portion of the steady-state internal photon-flux density, as determined by (16.2-
2), leaves the resonator in the form of useful light. The output photon-flux density фо is
that part of the internal photon-flux density that propagates toward, and is transmitted
by, mirror 1, 1.е., 6/2. If the transmittance of this mirror is J, the output photon-flux
density is then
Фо = 379. (16.2-3)
The corresponding optical intensity of the laser output J, is
I, = shv ТФ, (16.2-4)
and the laser output power is P, = ГА, where A is the cross-sectional area of the laser
beam. These equations, together with (16.2-2), permit the output power of the laser to
be explicitly calculated in terms of ¢;(v), No, Nt, J, and A.
Optimization of the Output Photon-Flux Density
The useful photon-flux density at the laser output diminishes the internal photon-flux
density and therefore contributes to the losses of the laser oscillator. Any attempt to in-
crease the fraction of photons allowed to escape from the resonator (in the expectation
of increasing the useful light output) results in increased losses so that the steady-state
photon-flux density inside the resonator decreases. The net result may therefore be a
decrease, rather than an increase, in the useful light output.
We proceed to demonstrate that there is an optical transmittance J (0 < J < 1)
that maximizes the laser output intensity. The output photon-flux density фо = T¢/2

668 CHAPTER16 LASERS

is a product of the mirror’s transmittance J and the internal photon-flux density ¢/2.
As J is increased, @ decreases as a result of the greater losses. At one extreme, when
J = 0, the oscillator has the least loss (@ is maximum), but there is no laser output
whatever (фо = 0). At the other extreme, when the mirror is removed so that J = 1,
the increased losses make a, > Yo(v) (№ > No), thereby preventing laser oscillation.
In this case ф = 0, so that again ¢, = 0. The optimal value of J lies somewhere
between these two extremes.

To determine this value, we must obtain an explicit relation between ¢, and J. Let
us assume that mirror 1, with reflectance R, and transmittance J = 1 — Rj, transmits
the useful light. The loss coefficient a, is written as a function of J by substituting in
(16.1-6) the loss coefficient associated with mirror 1,

1 1 1
Ami = — Ш— = -— In(l-T 16.2-5
m= а Mg =~ og №977) (16.25)
which leads to
1
а. = As + ата — od In(1 — 19), (16.2-6)
where the loss coefficient associated with mirror 2 is
1 1
Am2 = — In—. 16.2-7
We now use (16.2-1), (16.2-3), and (16.2-6) to obtain an equation for the transmitted
photon-flux density Фо as a function of the mirror transmittance,
_ 1 90 — —
Фо = 5657 ae — i ’ 9 = 2yo(v)d, L=2(as + ат2)а,
(16.2-8)
which is plotted in Fig. 16.2-3. Note that the transmitted photon-flux density is directly
related to the small-signal gain coefficient. The optical transmittance “Тор is determined
by setting the derivative of фо with respect to J equal to zero. When J < 1 we can
make use of the approximation ш(1 — J) = —T to obtain the expression
Top © V gol — L. (16.2-9)
0.2
Sle
33 Figure 16.2-3 Dependence of the trans-
a = mitted steady-state photon-flux density Фо on
Я 9 0.1 the mirror transmittance J. For the purposes
59 of this illustration, the gain factor gp = 2yod
Zs has been chosen to be 0.5 and the loss factor
L = 2(а, + ат2)а is 0.02 (2%). The optical
transmittance ор turns out to be 0.08.
0
0 0.1 0.2 0.3
Mirror transmittance T

16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASEROUTPUT 669
Internal Photon-Number Density
The steady-state number of photons per unit volume inside the resonator n is related to
the steady-state internal photon-flux density ф (for photons traveling in both directions)
by the simple relation

с

This is readily visualized by considering a cylinder of area A, length с, and volume
cA (c is the velocity of light in the medium), whose axis lies parallel to the axis
of the resonator. For a resonator containing n photons per unit volume, the cylinder
contains cAn photons. These photons travel in both directions, parallel to the axis of
the resonator, half of them crossing the base of the cylinder in each second. Since the
base of the cylinder also receives an equal number of photons from the other side,
however, the photon-flux density (photons per second per unit area in both directions)
is 6 = 2($cAn)/A = cn, from which (16.2-10) follows.

The photon-number density corresponding to the steady-state internal photon-flux
density in (16.2-2) is

N
n= п (1% _ 1) №» М, (16.2-11)
№, Steady-State
Photon-Number Density
where n, = ф, (и) /cis the photon-number density saturation value. Using the relations
os(v) = [t,0(V)]~1, ay = Y(V), а, = 1/cTp, and y(v) = No(v) = N,o(v), (16.2-
11) may be written in the form
n=(No—-M,)2,  №>№. (16.2-12)
Ts Steady-State
Photon-Number Density
This relation admits a simple and direction interpretation: (No — №) is the population
difference (per unit volume) in excess of threshold, and (№ — №) /т5 represents the
rate at which photons are generated which, by virtue of steady-state operation, is equal
to the rate at which photons are lost, n/7,. The fraction 7/7; is the ratio of the rate at
which photons are emitted to the rate at which they are lost.

Under ideal pumping conditions in a four-level laser system, (15.2-13) and (15.2-
14) provide that 7, = tsp and № = Rtsp, where К is the rate (s~'-cm~*) at which
atoms are pumped. Equation (16.2-12) can thus be written as

РЕВ, R>R, (16.2-13)
Tp
where К, = N;/tsp is the threshold value of the pumping rate. Under steady-state
conditions, therefore, the overall photon-density loss rate n/7, is precisely equal to the
excess pumping rate К — К..
Output Photon Flux and Efficiency
If transmission through the laser output mirror is the only source of resonator loss
(which is accounted for in T,), and У is the volume of the active medium, (16.2-13)

670 CHAPTER16 LASERS
provides that the total output photon flux ©, (photons per second) is
®, =(R—-R,)V, R> Rt. (16.2-14)
If there are loss mechanisms other than through the output laser mirror, the output
photon flux can be written as
®, = те (R— К, У, (16.2-15)
Laser Output Photon Flux
where the extraction efficiency 1, is the ratio of the loss arising from the extracted
useful light to all of the total losses in the resonator a...
If the useful light exits only through mirror 1, (16.1-8) and (16.2-5) for a, and a1
may be used to write 7. as
Omi _ € yt (16.2-16)
= = — TT, —. 27
Tea, 2d PR
If, furthermore, J = 1 — 2; < 1, (16.2-16) provides
ne AEST, (16.2-17)
Tr Extraction Efficiency
where we have defined 1/ Тк = c/2d, indicating that the extraction efficiency 7. can
be understood in terms of the ratio of the photon lifetime to its round-trip travel time,
multiplied by the mirror transmittance. The output laser power is then
P, = hy ®, = nehv(R — R,)V. (16.2-18)
With the help of a few algebraic manipulations it can be confirmed that this expression
accords with that obtained from (16.2-4).

Losses result from other sources as well, such as inefficiency in the pumping pro-
cess. Overhead functions, such as cooling and monitoring, also consume power. The
power-conversion efficiency 7. (also called the overall efficiency or the wall-plug
efficiency) is generally defined as the ratio of the output optical power P, to the input
electrical power P, :

P
йе = —. (16.2-19)
Pe Power-Conversion Efficiency
Representative values of 7, for various types of lasers are provided in Table 16.3-1.
Because the laser output power increases linearly with pump power above threshold, in
accordance with (16.2-18), the differential power-conversion efficiency (also called
the slope efficiency) is another oft-encountered measure of performance:
dP.
Ns ==: (16.2-20)
dP. Slope Efficiency

16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASER OUTPUT 671
The slope efficiency 77. is typically larger than the power-conversion efficiency 7.
Optically pumped lasers are often characterized by efficiencies analogous to those
provided in (16.2-19) and (16.2-20), with the optical pump power P, replacing the
electrical power P, . The optical-to-optical efficiency is thus defined as
Po
= — 16.2-21
=p ( )
while the optical-to-optical slope efficiency is expressed as
dP,
= —_—. 16.2-22
Is = 9 P. ( )
The optical-to-optical slope efficiency 77. is typically larger than the optical-to-optical
efficiency до, which is itself bounded by 7, < 1— q, where q is the quantum defect set
forth in (15.2-32).
B. Spectral Distribution
The spectral distribution of the generated laser light is determined both by the atomic
lineshape of the active medium (including whether it is homogeneous or inhomo-
geneously broadened) and by the resonator modes. This is illustrated in terms of the
two conditions for laser oscillations:

1. The gain condition requiring that the initial gain coefficient of the amplifier be
greater than the loss coefficient [yo(v) > a,]| is satisfied for all oscillation fre-
quencies lying within a continuous spectral band of width B centered about the
atomic resonance frequency м, as illustrated in Fig. 16.2-4(a). The bandwidth
В increases with the atomic linewidth Av and the ratio yo(vo)/a,; the precise
relation depends on the shape of the function yo(v).

2. The phase condition requires that the oscillation frequency be one of the res-
onator modal frequencies v, (assuming, for simplicity, that frequency pulling is
negligible). The FWHM linewidth of each mode is ди = vp /F [Fig. 16.2-4(6)].

Gain Yo()
(a) Figure 16.2-4 (a) Laser oscillation
7] Av can occur only at frequencies for which
Loss a, ———fP-—===\-——- the gain coefficient is greater than the
loss coefficient (shaded region). (b) Os-
ВИО cillation can occur only within a band
| > бы of the resonator modal frequencies
i ol be (which are represented as lines for sim-
Resonator plicity of illustration).
р р Allowed
: Н > modes
It follows that only a finite number of oscillation frequencies (11,12,..., им) are

672 CHAPTER16 LASERS
possible. The number of possible laser oscillation modes is therefore
B
М®=—, (16.2-23)
VP Number of
Possible Laser Modes
where vp = c/2d is the approximate spacing between adjacent modes. However,
of these М possible modes, the number of modes that actually carry optical power
depends on the nature of the atomic line broadening mechanism. It will be shown
below that for an inhomogeneously broadened medium all M modes oscillate (albeit
at different powers), whereas for a homogeneously broadened medium these modes
engage in some degree of competition, making it more difficult for as many modes to
oscillate simultaneously. Multimode lasers give rise to intensity-noise fluctuations that
arise from modal beating and modal competition.
ee

EXERCISE 16.2-1

Number of Modes т a Gas Laser. А Doppler-broadened gas laser has a gain coefficient with

a Gaussian spectral profile (see Sec. 14.3D and Exercise 14.3-2) that can be written as yo(v) =

Yo(Y) exp[—(v — Vo)? /202], where Ань = V8 In 2 op is the FWHM linewidth.

(a) Derive an expression for the allowed oscillation band В as a function of Ди, and the ratio
Yo(v%)/ar, where a, is the resonator loss coefficient.

(b) A He-Ne laser has a Doppler linewidth Av, = 1.5 GHz and a midband gain coefficient y9(vp) =
2х 10-3 сш '. The length of the laser resonator is 4 = 100 cm, and the reflectances of the
mirrors are 100% and 97% (all other resonator losses are negligible). Assuming that the refractive
index n = 1, determine the number of laser modes M.

ee

Homogeneously Broadened Medium

Immediately after being turned on, all laser modes for which the initial gain is greater

than the loss begin to grow, as portrayed in Fig. 16.2-5(a), and photon-flux densities

фт, ф2,...,Фм are created in the М modes.
Yo) yoy SCORN
/ \ I \
I \ I \
| \ | \
оу ИАА А --—
/ Ww / YY
т = Б `` — ——-
м и | и
VV. ИМ и
(а) (b) (c)

Figure 16.2-5 Growth of oscillation in an ideal homogeneously broadened medium. (a) Immedi-

ately following laser turn-on, all modal frequencies 1, 12,..., им, for which the gain coefficient

exceeds the loss coefficient, begin to grow, with the central modes growing at the highest rate.

(b) After a short time the gain saturates so that the central modes continue to grow while the peripheral

modes, for which the loss has become greater than the gain, are attenuated and eventually vanish.

(c) In the absence of spatial hole burning, only a single mode survives.

16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASER OUTPUT 673
Modes whose frequencies lie closest to the transition central frequency vo grow most
quickly and acquire the highest photon-flux densities. These photons interact with the
medium and reduce the gain by depleting the population difference. The saturated gain
coefficient may be written as
Yo(v)
y(v) = —=a (16.2-24)
1+ dj=1 9;/9(и;)
where ¢,(v;) is the saturation photon-flux density associated with mode 7. The validity
of (16.2-24) may be verified by carrying out an analysis similar to that which led to
(15.4-3). The saturated gain is displayed in Fig. 16.2-5(6).

Because the gain coefficient for a homogeneously broadened medium is reduced
uniformly, for modes sufficiently distant from the line center the loss becomes greater
than the gain; these modes lose power while the more central modes continue to grow,
albeit at a slower rate. Ultimately, only a single surviving mode (or two modes in the
symmetrical case) maintains a gain equal to the loss, with the loss exceeding the gain
for all other modes. Under ideal steady-state conditions, the power in this preferred
mode remains stable, while laser oscillation on all other modes vanishes [Fig. 16.2-
5(c)]. The surviving mode has the frequency that lies closest to 19; values of the gain
for its competitors lie below the loss line. Given the frequency of the surviving mode,
its photon-flux density may be determined by means of (16.2-2).

In practice, however, homogeneously broadened lasers do oscillate on multiple
modes because the different modes occupy different spatial portions of the active
medium. When oscillation on the most central mode in Fig. 16.2-5 is established, the
gain coefficient can still exceed the loss coefficient at locations where the standing-
wave electric field of the most central mode vanishes. This phenomenon is called
spatial hole burning. It allows another mode, whose peak fields are located near the
energy nulls of the central mode, an opportunity to lase as well.

Inhomogeneously Broadened Medium
In an inhomogeneously broadened medium, the gain Y)(v) represents the composite
envelope of the gains of different species of atoms (Sec. 14.3D), as illustrated in
Fig. 16.2-6.
/
/| | va YO
/ |
\
А_ Ди
CAAA
ААА
% и
Figure 16.2-6 The lineshape function of an inhomogeneously broadened medium is а composite
of numerous constituent atomic lineshape functions associated with different properties or different
environments.
The situation immediately after laser turn-on is the same as in the homogeneously
broadened medium. Modes for which the gain is larger than the loss begin to grow
and the gain decreases. If the spacing between the modes is larger than the width Av
of the constituent atomic lineshape functions, different modes interact with different

674 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
atoms. Atoms whose lineshapes fail to coincide with any of the modes are ignorant
of the presence of photons in the resonator. Their population difference is therefore
not affected and the gain they provide remains the small-signal (unsaturated) domain.
Atomic species whose frequencies coincide with modes deplete their inverted popula-
tions and their gains saturate, creating “holes” in the gain spectral profile [Fig. 16.2-
7(а)]. This process is known as spectral hole burning. The width of a spectral hole
increases with the photon-flux density in accordance with the square-root law associ-
ated with (15.4-16): Av, = Av(1+ ¢/¢;)'/?.
Yo) —_ _
YY)
Ap,
/ м
а. __ АМА __
АДА
И и" Vg, +1 и и
(а) (Б)
Figure 16.2-7 (а) Laser oscillation occurs in an inhomogeneously broadened medium by each
mode independently burning a hole in the overall spectral gain profile. The gain provided by the
medium to one mode does not influence the gain it provides to other modes. The central modes garner
contributions from more atoms, and therefore carry more photons than do the peripheral modes.
(b) Spectrum of a typical inhomogeneously broadened multimode gas laser.

The process of saturation by hole burning progresses independently for the differ-
ent modes until the gain is equal to the loss for each mode in steady state. Modes
do not compete because they draw power from different, rather than shared, atoms.
Many modes oscillate independently, with the central modes burning deeper holes and
growing larger, as illustrated in Fig. 16.2-7(a). The spectrum of a typical multimode
inhomogeneously broadened gas laser is displayed in Fig. 16.2-7(b). The number of
modes is typically larger than that in homogeneously broadened media since spatial
hole burning generally sustains fewer modes than spectral hole burning.

* Spectral Hole Burning т a Doppler-Broadened Medium

The lineshape function of a gas at temperature T’ arises from the collection of Doppler-
shifted emissions from the individual atoms, which move at different velocities
(Sec. 14.3D and Exercise 14.3-2). A stationary atom interacts with radiation of
frequency м. An atom moving with velocity у toward the direction of propagation
of the radiation interacts with radiation of frequency vo(1 + v/c) whereas an atom
moving away from the direction of propagation of the radiation interacts with radiation
of frequency vo(1 — v/c). Because a radiation mode of frequency v, travels in both
directions as it bounces back and forth between the mirrors of the resonator, it interacts
with atoms in two velocity classes: those traveling with velocity + у and those traveling
with velocity —v, such that му — м = +vov/c. It follows that the mode v, saturates
the populations of atoms on both sides of the central frequency and burns two holes in
the gain profile, as portrayed in Fig. 16.2-8. If и. = vo, only a single hole is burned in
the center of the profile, of course.

16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASER OUTPUT 675
т , , — Figure 16.2-8 Hole burning in a
Yo > ` У Doppler-broadened medium. А probe
, р wave at frequency и. saturates those
Av atomic populations with velocities v =
. с(и./м — 1) on both sides of the
" central frequency, burning two holes in
the gain profile.
ОИ
Vg и
The steady-state power of a mode increases with the depth of the hole(s) in the
gain profile. As the frequency v, moves toward мо from either side, the depth of the
holes increases, as does the power in the mode. As the modal frequency 1, begins to
approach 1, however, the mode begins to interact with only a single group of atoms
instead of two, so that the two holes collapse into one. This decrease in the number of
available active atoms when и, = мо causes the power of the mode to decrease slightly.
Thus, the power in a mode, plotted as a function of its frequency v,, takes the form of
a bell-shaped curve with a central depression, known as the Lamb dip, at its center
(Fig. 16.2-9).
Gain 7,0) —
Loss a, ——— Ш.
Resonator ‹ aa iy р | |
modes 2d ;
Ни и
ОИ:
Power of р р
mode 4 БР и >
и и
Figure 16.2-9 Power in a single laser mode of frequency v, in a Doppler-broadened medium
whose gain profile is centered about vp. Rather than providing maximum power at v, = Vp, it exhibits
the Lamb dip.
C. Spatial Distribution and Polarization
Spatial Distribution
The spatial distribution of the emitted laser light depends on the geometry of the
resonator and on the shape of the active medium. In the laser theory developed to
this point we have ignored transverse spatial effects by assuming that the resonator is
constructed of two parallel planar mirrors of infinite extent and that the space between
them is filled with the active medium. In this idealized geometry the laser output
is a plane wave propagating along the axis of the resonator. But as is evident from
Chapter 11, this planar-mirror resonator is highly sensitive to misalignment and laser

676 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

resonators usually have spherical mirrors. As indicated in Sec. 11.2, the spherical-
mirror resonator supports a Gaussian beam, which was studied in detail in Sec. 3.1. A
laser using a spherical-mirror resonator may therefore give rise to an output that takes
the form of a Gaussian beam.

It was also shown (in Sec. 11.2D) that the spherical-mirror resonator supports a
hierarchy of transverse electric and magnetic modes denoted ТЕМ; жд. Each pair of
indices (1, т) defines a transverse mode with an associated spatial distribution. The
(0,0) transverse mode is the Gaussian beam (Fig. 16.2-10). Modes of a higher J and
m form Hermite—Gaussian beams (Sec. 3.3 and Fig. 3.3-2). For a given ([, т), the
index q defines a number of longitudinal (axial) modes of the same spatial distribution
but of different frequencies и, (which are always separated by the longitudinal-mode
spacing vr = c/2d, regardless of | and т). The resonance frequencies of two sets
of longitudinal modes belonging to two different transverse modes are, in general,
displaced with respect to each other by some fraction of the mode spacing vp, as
indicated in (11.2-34). ty

. Laser
р ЗИ intensity
Spherical Spherical
mirror murror
Figure 16.2-10 The laser output for the (0,0) transverse mode of a spherical-mirror resonator
takes the form of a Gaussian beam.

Because of their different spatial distributions, different transverse modes experi-
ence different gains and losses. The (0,0) Gaussian mode, for example, is the most
confined about the optical axis and therefore suffers the least diffraction loss at the
mirror boundaries. The (1,1) mode vanishes at points on the optical axis (Fig. 3.3-
2); thus if the laser mirror were blocked by a small central obstruction, the (1, 1) mode
would be completely unaffected, whereas the (0,0) mode would suffer significant loss.
Higher-order modes occupy a larger volume and therefore can have larger gain. This
disparity between the losses and/or gains of different transverse modes in different
geometries determines their competitive edge in contributing to the laser oscillation, as
illustrated in Fig. 16.2-11.

Yoo
Ул
ra
р [ii ay, TEMo 9
/' H BS у
Аа
2277 By Sy “
Bo
(1,1) (0,0) modes и
Laser ВЫ | ai TEM, | +.
output | | |
ГО В В
и
Figure 16.2-11 The gains and losses for two transverse modes, say (0,0) and (1, 1), usually differ
because of their different spatial distributions. A mode can contribute to the output if it lies in the
spectral band of width B within which the gain coefficient exceeds the loss coefficient. Allowed
longitudinal modes associated with each transverse mode are shown.

16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASER OUTPUT 677

In a homogeneously broadened laser, the strongest mode tends to suppress the gain
for the other modes, but spatial hole burning can permit a few longitudinal modes
to oscillate. Transverse modes can have substantially different spatial distributions so
that they can readily oscillate simultaneously. A mode whose energy is concentrated
in a given transverse spatial region saturates the atomic gain in that region, thereby
burning a spatial hole there. Two transverse modes that do not spatially overlap can
coexist without competition because they draw their energy from different atoms.
Partial spatial overlap between different transverse modes and atomic migrations (as
occur in gases) allow for mode competition.

Lasers are often designed to operate on a single transverse mode; this is usually the
(0,0) Gaussian mode because it has the smallest beam diameter and can be focused to
the smallest spot size (Sec. 3.2). Oscillation on higher-order modes can be desirable,
on the other hand, for purposes such as generating large optical power.

Polarization
Each (1, т, а) mode has two degrees of freedom, corresponding to two independent
orthogonal polarizations. These two polarizations are regarded as two independent
modes. Because of the circular symmetry of the spherical-mirror resonator, the two
polarization modes of the same [ and т have the same spatial distributions. If the
resonator and the active medium provide equal gains and losses for both polarizations,
the laser will oscillate on the two modes simultaneously, independently, and with the
same intensity. The laser output is then unpolarized (Sec. 12.4).
Unstable Resonators
Though our discussion has focused on laser configurations that make use of stable
resonators (Fig. 1 1.2-3), the use of unstable resonators offers a number of advantages
in the operation of high-power lasers, including the following: (1) a greater portion of
the gain medium contributes to the laser output power as a result of the availability of
a larger modal volume; (2) higher output powers may be obtained from operation on
the lowest-order transverse mode, rather than on higher-order transverse modes as in
the case of stable resonators; and (3) high output power can be attained by making use
of purely reflective water-cooled optics that permits the laser light to spill out around
the mirror edges.
D. Mode Selection
A multimode laser may be operated on a single mode by making use of an element
inside the resonator to provide loss sufficient to prevent oscillation on undesired modes.
Selection of a Laser Line
An active medium with multiple transitions (atomic lines) whose populations are in-
verted by the pumping mechanism will produce a multiline laser output. A particular
line may be selected for oscillation by placing a prism inside the resonator, as shown
schematically in Fig. 16.2-12.
Output
High-reflectance р: т 1 murror
murror
A i Laser
\ < nN Active medium Aperture output
Unwanted line
Figure 16.2-12 A particular atomic line may be selected by the use of a prism placed inside the
resonator. A transverse mode may be selected by means of a spatial aperture of carefully chosen
shape and size.

678 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
The prism is adjusted such that only light of the desired wavelength strikes the highly
reflecting mirror at normal incidence and can therefore be reflected back to complete
the feedback process. By rotating the prism, one wavelength at a time may be selected.
Argon-ion lasers, as an example, often contain a rotatable prism in the resonator to
allow the choice of one of six common laser lines, stretching from 488 nm in the blue
to 514.5 nm in the blue-green. A prism can only be used to select a line if the other lines
are well separated from it. It cannot be used, for example, to select one longitudinal
mode from another; adjacent modes are too closely spaced for the dispersive refraction
provided by the prism to distinguish them.
Selection of a Transverse Mode
Different transverse modes have different spatial distributions, so that an aperture of
controllable shape placed inside the resonator may be used to selectively attenuate
undesired modes (Fig. 16.2-12). The laser mirrors may also be designed to favor a
particular transverse mode.
Selection of a Polarization
A polarizer may be used to convert unpolarized light into polarized light. It is advanta-
geous, however, to place the polarizer inside the resonator rather than outside it since an
external polarizer wastes half the output power generated by the laser. The light trans-
mitted by an external polarizer can also suffer from noise arising from the fluctuation
of power between the two polarization modes (mode hopping). An internal polarizer
creates high losses for one polarization so that oscillation on its corresponding mode
never even begins and the atomic gain is devoted solely to the surviving polarization.
An internal polarizer is usually implemented by means of Brewster windows (Sec. 6.2
and Exercise 6.2-1), as illustrated in Fig. 16.2-13.
Brewster Active Brewster Polarized
window medium window laser output
Oo
High-reflectance / Output
murror murror
Figure 16.2-13 The use of Brewster windows in a gas laser provides a linearly polarized output
laser beam. Light polarized in the plane of incidence (the TM wave) is transmitted without reflection
loss through a window placed at the Brewster angle. The orthogonally polarized (TE) mode suffers
reflection loss and therefore does not oscillate.
Selection of a Longitudinal Mode
A single longitudinal mode can be selected by appropriately modifying the resonator.
The number of longitudinal modes in an inhomogeneously broadened laser (e.g., a
Doppler-broadened gas laser) is the number of resonator modes contained in a fre-
quency band B within which the atomic gain is greater than the loss (Fig. 16.2-4).
At first blush, there are two obvious alternatives for operating a laser on a single
longitudinal mode, but neither turns out to be satisfactory for the reasons indicated:
1) the loss can be increased sufficiently so that only the mode with the largest gain
oscillates, but the surviving mode is then itself weak; 2) the longitudinal-mode spacing,
Vp = c/2d, can be increased by reducing the resonator length, thereby leaving only a
single mode within the band B, but this reduces the volume of the active medium and
hence also results in a weak surviving mode.

16.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LASER OUTPUT 679
Rather, intracavity frequency-selective elements can be conveniently used to alter
the frequency spacings of the allowed resonator modes and thereby permit single
longitudinal-mode operation. Two commonly used configurations are detailed below:
the use of an intracavity tilted etalon and the use of multiple-mirror resonators.
Intracavity tilted etalon. A Fabry-Perot resonator whose mirror separation dj is
much shorter (thinner) than the laser resonator, 1.е., an intracavity tilted etalon, may be
used for longitudinal-mode selection, as illustrated in Fig. 16.2-14. Modes of the thin
etalon have large spacing c/2d, > В, so that only one etalon mode can fit within the
laser amplifier bandwidth. The etalon is designed so that one of its modes coincides
with the resonator longitudinal mode exhibiting the highest gain (or any other desired
mode). The etalon may be fine-tuned by means of a slight rotation, by changing its
temperature, or by slightly changing its width d, with the help of a piezoelectric (or
other) transducer. The etalon is slightly tilted with respect to the resonator axis to
prevent reflections from its surfaces from reaching the resonator mirrors and creating
undesired additional resonances. The etalon is usually temperature stabilized to assure
frequency stability.
Etalon
High- kg Active medium Output
reflectance I] 1 mirror
mirror АА d |
Gain
Resonator
ии < Toss
м и
Resonator с
modes a] “|| 1111111 11|
Etalon / \ / \ | / \
modes | < | и
241
Газег |
output и
Figure 16.2-14 Longitudinal mode selection by use of a thin intracavity etalon. Oscillation occurs
at frequencies where a mode of the resonator coincides with an etalon mode; both must, of course,
lie within the spectral window where the gain of the medium exceeds the loss.
Multiple-mirror resonators. Mode selection can also be achieved by making use of
multiple-mirror resonators. Several configurations are illustrated in Fig. 16.2-15. Mode
selection may be achieved by means of two coupled resonators of different lengths
[Fig. 16.2-15(a)]. The resonator in Fig. 16.2-15(b) consists of two coupled cavities,
each with its own gain — in essence, two coupled lasers. Yet another configuration
makes use of a resonator coupled with an interferometer [Fig. 16.2-15(c)].

680 CHAPTER16 LASERS
oo
Figure 16.2-15 Longitudinal mode selec-
tion achieved with the help of: (a) two
(b) ея | РН | coupled resonators (one passive and one
active); (b) two coupled active resonators;
(c) a coupled resonator—interferometer.
Laser Linewidth
The FWHM spectral width Av, of the output of a single-mode laser can in princi-
ple be far smaller than the spectral width of a resonator mode, dv я vp/F. The
width Av, is limited by the so-called Schawlow—Townes linewidth, which accommo-
dates random-phase spontaneous-emission contributions that combine with the laser-
oscillation mode. The FWHM value of the Schawlow—Townes linewidth for a four-
level system, which is given Бу Avs, = при (6v)?/P,, can be minimized by: 1) in-
creasing the resonator length d, which decreases the free spectral range vp = c,/2nd
and thus ди; 2) reducing the resonator loss, which increases У and hence reduces ди;
and 3) increasing the laser output power P,. In carefully controlled experiments, it
is possible to approach the Schawlow—Townes laser-linewidth limit. However, most
lasers have linewidths substantially greater than this limit as a result of external effects
such as resonator mechanical vibrations, active-medium temperature fluctuations, and
pump-power fluctuations. Free-running lasers usually exhibit linewidths that lie in the
kHz to GHz range. Single-mode laser linewidths can be reduced to the mHz domain
by various stabilization techniques, although attaining a linewidth below 1 Hz is chal-
lenging.
16.3 TYPES OF LASERS
Laser amplification and oscillation is ubiquitous; it occurs in an enormous variety
of media, including solids (crystals, glasses, fibers, powders), gases (atomic, ionic,
molecular, excimeric), and liquids (organic-dye solutions). A single biological cell can
serve as a laser when genetically programmed to produce green fluorescent protein.
Plasmas support laser action in the extreme-ultraviolet and X-ray regions, and rela-
tivistic electrons wiggling in a magnetic field serve as an active medium for the free-
electron laser. We discuss a number of examples of lasers in these various categories.
Parameters associated with lasers assume a wide range of values and extend over many
orders of magnitude:
= Physical sizes range from nanometers to kilometers; interstellar molecular clouds
exhibiting maser action extend over terameters.
= Emission frequencies span nearly 10 orders of magnitude, from GHz in the
microwave to EHz in the hard-X-ray.
= Spectral linewidths extend over more than 15 orders of magnitude, from mHz to
THz.
= Peak powers stretch 24 orders of magnitude, from nanowatts to petawatts.
= Pulse durations of lasers and laser-based systems reach from tens of attoseconds
to CW.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 681
A. Solid-State Lasers
The energy-level diagrams of several solid-state laser materials (ruby, alexandrite,
Nd?+:YAG, and Nd**:glass) were displayed in Figs. 14.1-4 and 14.1-5, and the op-
eration of several solid-state laser amplifiers (ruby, Nd°*:glass, and Er**:silica fiber)
were examined in Figs. 15.3-1, 15.3-3, and 15.3-6, respectively. A number of charac-
teristics of the principal laser transitions in these, and other, doped dielectric media are
summarized in Table 15.3-1. When suitably pumped and placed in an optical resonator
providing feedback, all of these solid-state materials behave as laser oscillators. When
ground into powders, some solid-state laser materials function as random lasers.
Crystalline, ceramic, and glass hosts. There are numerous varieties of solid-state
lasers since dozens of transparent dielectric media are commonly used as host materials
to accommodate many kinds of active dopant ions. Crystalline hosts include oxides,
garnets, fluorides, vanadates, and double-tungstates. The most common host materi-
als are AlgO3 (sapphire), Y3Al;O 2 (yttrium aluminum garnet ог YAG), ГазАБО12
(lutetium aluminum garnet ог LuAG), YLiF, (yttrium lithium fluoride or YLF), УУО4
(yttrium vanadate, also known as yttrium orthovanadate), KY(WO,)2 (potassium yt-
trium tungstate or KYW), and KGd(WO,)z (potassium gadolinium tungstate or KGW).
Semiconductor crystals such as ZnS and ZnSe also serve as suitable hosts for solid-
state lasers.

High optical-quality transparent polycrystalline ceramic hosts, with the same com-
positions as their single-crystal counterparts, are increasingly being used because of the
many salutary features they offer, including increased power and efficiency, reduced
cost, and options for fabricating flexible composite structures.

Glass hosts also enjoy wide use; these include silicate-based compositions (such
as noncrystalline 5102, which is fused silica) and phosphate-based compositions,
which have long been favored for high-power and pulsed-laser applications (see, e.g.,
Sec. 15.3B). Because they are poor conductors of heat, however, glass lasers are
principally used in systems that operate at very high powers with low duty cycles.
Notable exceptions are the glass hosts used in fiber lasers, which have large area-to-
volume ratios that facilitate cooling.

Comparing the characteristics of lasers that make use of crystalline or ceramic

hosts with those that use glass hosts reveals that the former category typically offers
homogeneous broadening (see Sec. 14.3D) with narrower linewidths and correspond-
ingly lower laser thresholds, higher thermal conductivities, and increased resistance
to solarization (darkening caused by the ultraviolet component of flashlamp light).
In contrast, glass hosts, which exhibit inhomogeneous broadening, have a number
of distinct merits: they are isotropic, easily fabricated with high optical quality and
homogeneous doping, they retain their optical finishes, and they are readily grown in
large sizes (Sec. 15.3B).
Dopant ions. The lion’s share of dopant ions used as active laser media in host
crystals are transition-metal or lanthanide-metal (rare-earth) ions, but actinide-metal
ions are also occasionally employed (Table 14.1-1). The dopant ions are generally
dispersed throughout the host and act as independent radiators, much as organic-dye
ions behave in a solvent. The dopant concentration (molar percentage) typically lies in
the vicinity of 1%; however, it can be as small as 0.01% or as large as 50%, depending
on the dopant, host material, and application. To minimize strain, the host material
is generally chosen so that the active dopant ion is comparable in atomic size to the
substituted atom.

Trivalent chromium ions doped into sapphire (Cr?+:Al,O3), 1.е., ruby, was the
first material to be crafted into a laser (page 657). Ruby suffers from low efficiency,

682 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

however, because it is a three-level system. Alexandrite (Cr*+:BeAl,0,), another
early Cr?+-doped solid-state laser, finds occasional use in dermatology. When used as
an active laser ion, Cr?+ is nowadays often doped into colquiriite materials such as
LiCaAlF, (LiCAF), LiSrAIFg (LiSAF), or LiSrGaFg (LiSGaF). Alexandrite and the
Cr?+-doped colquiriites may be efficiently pumped by red AllnGaP laser diodes.

Of the vast array of host and dopant-ion combinations for solid-state lasers,
among the most commonly encountered are Nd?+:YVO,4, Nd?+:YAG, УБЗ+:УАС,
Ti**+:sapphire, and Cr?+:ZnS, and we consider these in turn. Many other solid-state
lasers also belong to the family of rare-earth-doped dielectrics, including Er?+:YAG,
Ho®*:YAG, and Tm?+:YAG. As discussed in Sec. 14.1B, the energy levels of the
rare-earth ions (but not the sublevels thereof) are essentially independent of the host
material because their 4} electrons are well shielded from the lattice by the filled 5s
and 5p subshells (Table 14.1-1).

Diode-pumped solid-state lasers. Solid-state lasers that are optically pumped by
laser diodes (or bars or stacks of laser diodes) are known as diode-pumped solid-state
(DPSS) lasers. These devices convert the relatively broadband, multimode output of
laser diodes into the narrowband, single-mode output of solid-state lasers. DSPPs are
compact and highly efficient devices that have excellent beam quality. They offer a
variety of wavelengths, dictated by their attendant electronic and vibronic transitions,
which can be augmented by harmonic generation and other forms of optical frequency
conversion (Chapter 22). Diode-pumped solid-state lasers find wide application in
industry, medicine, and research.
Neodymium-Doped Yttrium Vanadate
Nd?+:YVO,j is a dielectric medium with refractive index n = 2.0. The host material is
transparent over a broad range of wavelengths, from 0.3 to 2.5 ит. The energy levels
associated with lasing as a four-level system are illustrated in Fig. 16.3-1; the laser
threshold is substantially lower than that of three-level ruby.
2.0
Nd**:YVO,
“F 5) питании ТЗ 15
о =
©)
2 "Uy, 08
2 10 во Nd**:YVO, wes
5 064-1 2 \)
jaa]
“han + 05
LBO
“Tin $;
3.
Ly ©) a0 , 1.064 и 22m
(a) (d)
Figure 16.3-1 (а) Selected energy levels of Nd?+:YVO,. The red arrow indicates the principal
laser transition at a wavelength of 1.064 jm in the near infrared. The four interacting energy levels
are indicated by encircled numbers. (5) Configuration of a Nd?+:YVOy, laser with an intracavity
frequency-doubling lithium-triborate (LBO) crystal that generates light at A,/2 = 532 nm via
second-harmonic generation (Sec. 22.2A).

Optical pumping is readily implemented by making use of an 808-nm AlGaAs laser-

diode array to raise the Nd** ions to level @) (“F5/2) at 1.53 eV. The @>@ (*F 3/2 >

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 683
Th /2) transition is responsible for laser action at the iconic wavelength of 1.064 ym.
Alternatively, laser action on this transition can be attained by direct in-band pumping
(Fig. 15.2-8) from level ©) to level @ at 880 nm (using AlGaAs laser diodes), or at
wavelengths as long as 914 nm (using InGaAs laser diodes). In the latter case, the small
quantum defect (q = 14%) results in an output power > 10 W at 1.064 yum, with an
optical-to-optical efficiency 7, = 80%. Light from an intracavity frequency-doubled
Nd?+:Y VO, laser often serves as а 532-nm pump for а Ti:sapphire laser (Fig. 16.3-3).

The 4F3/2 — “11/2 and *F'3/2 — “Ig/ transitions also support laser action at wave-
lengths of 1.34 ила and at 914 nm, respectively, in the latter case as a quasi-three-level
system. Frequency doubling of the stimulated emission at 914 nm generates blue light
at 457 nm. Neodymium-doped yttrium vanadate is distinguished from neodymium-
doped glass (Fig. 14.1-5) by its higher refractive index, homogeneous broadening, and
smaller transition linewidth (Table 15.3-1).

Neodymium-Doped Yttrium Aluminum Garnet

Developed in 1964, Nd*+:YAG, whose energy levels are displayed in Fig. 14.1-5, is
one of the oldest and most widely used of all diode-pumped solid-state lasers. It is a
compact system that provides high output power. Because the optically active 4f elec-
trons in Nd** are shielded from the crystalline host, the energy levels of this material
are similar to those of neodymium-doped yttrium vanadate (Fig. 16.3-1). Nd°+:YAG
lasers often incorporate intracavity doubling crystals, as illustrated in Fig. 16.3-1 for
Nd?+:YVOx,. Though it can be pumped by flashlamp, Nd°+:YAG is most conveniently
pumped as a four-level system using an AlGaAs laser-diode array at 808 nm, much as
with Nd**+:YVOx,. Crystals with lengths as short as a few hundred ити can serve as
efficient, single-frequency, thin-disk lasers.

The most common laser line offered by Nd?*+:YAG is at a wavelength of A, =
1.06415 ит. The sublevels of the three manifolds associated with this laser transition
are displayed in Fig. 14.1-6; the numbers of distinct sublevels are (24 + 1)/2 = 5,
6, and 2, respectively. This particular laser line arises from a transition between the
upper sublevel of the “Е. /2 manifold at 1.4269 eV and the third-from-bottom sublevel
of the “Гу /2 manifold at 0.2616 eV. When frequency doubled, this transition provides
green light at 532 nm. Transitions among the different sublevels within the upper and
lower laser manifolds offer a multitude of possible laser wavelengths that span the
wavelength range between 1.052 and 1.122 ит. In particular, lasing can be achieved
at Ло = 1.12238 ит via a transition between the lower of the two levels in the 4F; /2
manifold at 1.4165 eV and the highest of the levels in the 47,, /2 manifold at 0.3117 eV.
This represents the longest wavelength that can be attained using a transition between
these manifolds; when frequency doubled, this transition yields yellow-green light at
Ло = 561 nm.

Nd**:YAG can also be operated аз a quasi-three-level system on the “Еу/> — 19/2
transition, generating light at 946 nm; intracavity frequency doubling then provides
blue light at 473 nm. Many other possibilities abound since oscillation on the dominant
transition can be suppressed by making use of photonic-crystal filters, for example. As
with Nd?+:YVOu,, in-band pumping (Fig. 15.2-8) at 880 nm can be used to raise the
Nd?* ions from the ground state directly to the upper manifold, a scheme that has the
merit of a small quantum defect.

The principal disadvantages of Nd?*:YAG relative to Nd?+:Y VO, are its narrower
ы /2 absorption band (rendering it more sensitive to wavelength variations in the
pump laser diodes), higher threshold, lower slope efficiency, and unpolarized output.
A distinct advantage, however, is that it can tolerate approximately three times the
thermal fracture stress. Indeed, when configured appropriately, Nd**+:YAG can produce
multi-kilowatt output powers. It continues to be the workhorse of diode-pumped solid-
state lasers.

684 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
тии |
EXAMPLE 16.3-1. Power-Conversion Efficiency of a Diode-Pumped Nd** :YAG Laser.
A 1-cm-long water-cooled laser-diode bar comprising 25 AlGaAs broad-area laser diodes emitting at
a wavelength of 808 nm is used to pump а Nd**+:YAG laser rod operating at 1064 nm on the basis of
a four-level pumping scheme. Each laser diode emits 4 W and is spaced 0.4 mm from its neighbor in
the form of a 1D array. The bar consumes 200 W of electrical power and delivers 100 W of optical
power so its power-conversion efficiency is 50%. In accordance with the expression for the quantum
defect д provided in (15.2-32), the pumping efficiency is 1 — д = 808/1064 = 76%; furthermore,
the transfer of pump radiation to, and useful absorption by, the Nd?+:YAG laser rod has an efficiency
of about 65%. Mode matching and optical energy retention in the resonator is 60% efficient. The
overall power-conversion efficiency 7. of the electrically driven Nd?+:YAG laser is therefore 15%.
Pumping this laser with a single laser-diode bar that consumes 200 W of electrical power results in an
output of 30 W at 1064 nm. The output power can be increased by pumping with stacks of laser-diode
bars. CW and pulsed Nd**+:YAG lasers are widely used in manufacturing, materials processing, and
medicine, and have myriad other applications, such as rangefinding.
ии |
Ytterbium-Doped Yttrium Aluminum Garnet
Yb?+:YAG thin-disk lasers, which operate on the basis of guasi-three-level pumping,
make use of a 940-nm laser-diode pump (Fig. 16.3-2).
2.0
Yb**: YAG
1.5
них
2
я © “Psp
5 @ 10 Laser-diode pump
> : ZS .
ZZ Mirror
я
a 1.030-
Pump Taset Ca (3
0.5 У
Pe
Retro 4 5
‚, @ reflector QS
Fin 0
(a) (В)
Figure 16.3-2 (а) Energy levels pertinent to the ytterbium-doped YAG laser transition at Ло =
1.030 ит. Yb*+:YAG behaves as а quasi-three-level system at Т= 300° К and as a four-level
system when cooled to T = 77° K, which serves to reduce the thermal population in the lower
laser level. (b) Schematic of a single-frequency, single-mode Yb**+:YAG thin-disk laser. The active
medium typically has a thickness of several hundred ym. The pump light is passed through the active
medium some 20 times by an optical system that includes a parabolic mirror and a retroreflector.
High gain is achieved by using Yb?+ doping levels ~ 25%.
High-efficiency absorption of the pump light is achieved by passing it through the
active medium multiple times with the help of suitably designed optics. High gain
is attained by using high Yb°* doping levels. The pump wavelength Л, = 940 nm,
usually provided by an InGaAs laser-diode array, is quite close to the laser wavelength
Xo = 1030 nm so that the quantum defect д is small. Hence, little heat is generated in
the crystal.
Moreover, the thin-disk configuration allows the residual heat to be effectively re-
moved by heat-sink mounting or fluid immersion, thereby permitting the TEM po spatial
mode to be maintained. Thin-disk lasers can generate hundreds of watts of single-mode

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 685
CW optical power and many kilowatts of multimode CW power at 1.030 jum. When
frequency-doubled, the ytterbium-doped YAG laser provides a strong source of green
light at 515 nm that has replaced the Art laser in many applications.

Yb?* ions are also welcome dopants in hosts such as yttrium vanadate, as well as in
various double-tungstates, borates, sesquioxides, and glasses. In particular, ytterbium-
doped double-tungstates such as Yb**:KYW and Yb**:KGW make efficient use of
in-band pumping at 981 nm (rather than at 940 nm), further reducing the quantum
defect q and therefore the heat dissipated. Moreover, the large transition linewidths
and good thermal properties associated with these hosts render them ideal for use as
thin-disk, mode-locked lasers that can generate average powers in excess of 100 W
and pulses with durations below 100 fs. Thin-disk lasers may also be fabricated using
Nd?*:Y VO, and Nd?+:YAG.

Titanium-Doped Sapphire
The ТЗ :sapphire laser is widely used because it is tunable over a substantial range of
wavelengths. Another of its merits is that it can be mode-locked to provide ultrashort
pulses (Sec. 16.4D). The energy levels relevant to lasing in this four-level system are
displayed in Fig. 16.3-3.
3.0
Ti**: ALO; (Ti: Sapphire)
2.5
2Е 732
2.0
5 ® @
Lv
5 1.5 . .
5 Tunable Pump Ti:Sapphire
Я 1азег —
Pump | 1.0
Pulse compressor
0.5 |
© 27, Output
0 Looe eee
(а) (Б)
Figure 16.3-3 (а) Selected energy bands of Ti**+:Al.03. The red arrow indicates the principal
laser transition of this vibronic system, which is tunable between 700 and 1050 nm. Dark-to-
light shading in the bands indicates a decrease in relative occupancy. (b) Schematic diagram of a
Ti>+:Al,O3 mode-locked laser. The two prisms within the shaded box provide intracavity dispersion
compensation (Sec. 23.2). Wavelength tuning over tens of nm is achieved by means of a rotatable
birefringent filter (BRF) that acts as a bandpass filter for the polarized intracavity beam; tuning over
a larger range is effected by adjusting one of the prisms. The green pump light is often provided by a
frequency-doubled Nd?+:Y VO, laser, such as that illustrated in Fig. 16.3-1.

During the course of crystal growth, a small fraction (== 1%) of the АПТ ions in
sapphire are replaced by Ti** ions. Like ruby, the material is principally sapphire
and therefore has a refractive index п = 1.76. Optical pumping can be provided
by a frequency-doubled Nd*+:YVO,4 or Nd*+:YAG DPSS laser operating at 532 nm
(Fig. 16.3-1), or by a frequency-doubled Yb?+:YAG DPSS laser operating at 515 nm
(Fig. 16.3-2). Alternatively, direct pumping with a green laser-diode array can be used.

Each titanium ion, which has a single 3d! active electron (Table 14.1-1), is sur-
rounded by six oxygen atoms at an octahedral site. This ion is therefore subjected to

686 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

significant crystal-field and orbital interactions. As with other transition-metal ions in
dielectric hosts, the titanium-doped sapphire energy levels displayed in Fig. 16.3-3 are
designated by group-theoretical, rather than by term symbols (Sec. 14.1B). Moreover,
the electronic energy levels are strongly coupled to the lattice vibrations, resulting
in broad bands of vibronic states. Stimulated emission is thus accompanied by the
simultaneous emission of one or more phonons. The occupancy of the ?Т. band follows
a Boltzmann distribution so that its upper reaches are essentially unoccupied and the
system behaves as a four-level laser, as shown in Fig. 16.3-3(a).

The laser transition indicated by a red arrow in Fig. 16.3-3(a) can be tuned over а
few tens of nm by making use of a rotatable birefringent filter installed at the Brewster
angle within the cavity [Fig. 16.3-3(6)], which acts as a bandpass filter for the polarized
intracavity beam. Greater changes in wavelength are effected by adjusting the internal
optics since the cavity group velocity dispersion changes with wavelength. The net
result is that a broad range of wavelengths, from 700 nm in the red to 1050 nm in the
near infrared, can be accessed. A typical Ti?+:Al.O3 laser provides = 5 W of optical
power when operated CW. When mode-locked, it can generate a sequence of 10-fs,
50-nJ pulses with peak power P, = 5 MW, at a repetition rate of ~ 80 MHz; repetition
rates exceeding 10 GHz can also be attained. Applications range from multiphoton
imaging to nonlinear optics to petawatt physics.

Because of the importance of lattice vibrations in the tunability of this laser, it is
described as a phonon-terminated or vibronic laser. In general, a vibronic transition
comprises a simultaneous change in the electronic and vibrational states of a system.
The chromium-doped forsterite laser and the alexandrite laser (Fig. 14.1-4) also fall in
this class, as does the dye laser (Sec. 16.3E) since molecular vibrations play the same
role as lattice vibrations. It is often convenient to use in-band pumping with vibronic
lasers.

Transition-lon-Doped Zinc Chalcogenides

A family of vibronic lasers with continuous tunability, analogous to the Ti:sapphire
laser but in the mid infrared, makes use of zinc-chalcogenide ceramic hosts doped
with transition-metal ions. Among the most widely used members of this family are
Cr?+:ZnS and Cr?*:ZnSe. Both ZnS and ZnSe are wide-bandgap II-VI semiconductor
materials (Fig. 17.1-8) that are readily doped with Сг?* ions that substitute for a
fraction of the Zn?* ions comprising the lattice. (This substitutional doping is to be
distinguished from doping with ions of valences other than two for purposes of creating
n- and p-type semiconductors.) These four-level solid-state lasers offer single-mode,
linearly polarized, CW operation on the 5Е — 5Т> transition with P, = 100 У,
M? < 1.1, linewidth < 1/2 nm, and с = 25%. Using an external cavity, they can be
tuned over a wavelength range stretching from 1.9 to 3.0 ит. Though pumping can be
effected by means of a laser-diode array, as with traditional DPSS lasers, Er°* :silica-
fiber pumps offer greater optical power in this wavelength range. Much as with the
Ti>*:sapphire laser, a mode-locked Cr?+:ZnS laser can provide a sequence of 30-fs,
50-nJ pulses at a repetition rate between 80 MHz and 1 GHz, with P, = 1.7 MW and
Po = 5 W.

Other members of this family of materials include Fe?*+:ZnS and Fe?*+:ZnSe, which
can be tuned over a wavelength range stretching from 3.8 to 4.8 т. These longer-
wavelength lasers offer single-mode, linearly polarized CW operation with P, = 100
mW, M? < 1.2, and linewidths < 1 nm. In the current state of their development,
however, the iron-doped devices require cooling to achieve CW operation. Efficient
pumping is provided by a Tm? :silica-fiber laser. In spite of the fact that transition-ion-
doped zinc-chalcogenide lasers operate only over a limited range in the mid IR, they
have the merit of being continuously tunable. Other commonly encountered sources of
radiation in the mid infrared are considered in Sec. 18.4D.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 687

B. Fiber Lasers
With suitable feedback, rare-earth-doped fiber amplifiers can be made to operate as
highly efficient fiber lasers. The most commonly used dopant ions for fiber lasers are
neodymium (Nd°*), ytterbium (Yb?*), erbium (Er°*), and thulium (Tm**). These
ions offer useful laser transitions at near-infrared wavelengths, in the vicinity of
1.06, 1.07, 1.55, and 2.00 ила, respectively (among many other wavelengths). Silica-
glass fibers are generally preferred as hosts because they are endowed with optical
and mechanical properties superior to those of most other glass fibers. However,
the transparency of silica glass diminishes appreciably for wavelengths longer than
about 2.2 ит, so that fibers fabricated from fluorides and other glasses are also used
(Sec. 10.5). To first order, the energy levels of rare-earth-ion laser transitions are little
affected by the host material, as explained in Sec. 14.1B. Consequently, the energy-
level diagrams for Nd?*, Yb°*, and Er?* ions embedded in silica-fiber hosts are nearly
indistinguishable from those presented in Figs. 14.1-5, 16.3-2, and 15.3-6, respectively,
at the illustrated resolution. Fiber lasers, like diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers,
are usually pumped by laser-diode arrays, although they are sometimes pumped by
other fiber lasers. The first fiber laser, developed by Elias Snitzer in 1961 (one year
after Maiman demonstrated the ruby laser), made use of a core of neodymium-doped
glass.
Fiber lasers offer many salutary features, including:

= High optical power (the large area-to-volume ratio facilitates cooling).

= High power-conversion efficiency.

= Diffraction-limited beam quality.

= Stability against temperature variations and vibrations.

= Compact, robust, and maintenance-free construction.

a Ability to operate on low-gain transitions (the gain region can be arbitrarily long).

A simplified schematic illustrating a typical fiber laser that uses diode-laser pumping
and fiber Bragg-grating (FBG) reflectors is displayed in Fig. 16.3-4. FBGs have the
merit that they are robust and do not require realignment.

Gain 7 z \N
Outer Cladding
Inner Core

Figure 16.3-4 (a) Simplified schematic of a laser-diode-pumped fiber laser that makes use of fiber
Bragg gratings (FBGs) as reflectors. Pumping often involves arrays of broad-area multimode laser
diodes whose light is coupled into the outer core of the fiber via multimode couplers, sometimes in
both the forward and backward directions. (b) Concentric double-clad fiber configuration. A single-
mode inner core fosters single-transverse-mode oscillation. Many double-clad configurations are
designed to increase the overlap between the inner core and the skew rays of the outer core (Fig. 10.1-
2). For example, the inner core may be shifted off-center (toward the edge of the outer core), or the
outer core may be rectangular, hexagonal, octagonal, or D-shaped.
A double-clad fiber configuration enables the laser mode to propagate in the inner
core while the multimode pump light circulates in the inner cladding/outer core. This
configuration is widely used to avoid the deleterious nonlinear effects that would arise

688 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

from a high-power pump concentrated in the small inner core.Fiber laser operation
has been achieved in many configurations, and makes use of various forms of end
pumping and side pumping. Slab-waveguide fiber lasers, also known as ribbon fiber
lasers, have a rectangular cross section and can provide output powers greater than
those offered by traditional fibers. Photonic-bandgap fiber lasers can be configured
so that the light emerges radially from the full circumferential surface of the fiber,
rather than axially.

Master-Oscillator Power-Amplifier (MOPA)

A master-oscillator power-amplifier (MOPA) is a configuration consisting of a
master-oscillator (seed laser) followed by an optical amplifier to boost its output
power. MOPAs may contain various combinations of fiber, diode-pumped solid-state,
and semiconductor lasers and amplifiers. In the special case when the power-amplifier
is a fiber-amplifier, a MOPA is also referred to as a master-oscillator fiber-amplifier
(MOFA). Though it is admittedly more complex to implement a MOPA than to
use a single high-power laser to directly produce a given output power, the MOPA
approach enjoys a number of distinct advantages. These stem from the relative ease of
controlling a low-power seed laser, in which devices such as filters and modulators can
be readily inserted because of the low-power intracavity environment; such devices
can alternatively be placed between the oscillator and amplifier. This in turn facilitates
the ability to optimize the MOPA output parameters, such as wavelength tuning range,
laser linewidth, beam quality, and pulse duration. Moreover, the power-amplifier
segment of the MOPA is subject only to the limited output power of the seed laser and
not to the large intracavity optical power associated with full-fledged laser oscillation.

Another advantage of the MOPA configuration is its modularity. This feature offers
a template for using concatenated amplifier stages with successively greater capacities,
such as modal area and optical power. An example is provided by the MOPA at the
National Ignition Facility (МЕ), as described in Sec. 15.3B. A diode-pumped УЪЗ+-
doped fiber laser, by virtue of its stability and the high quality of its beam, serves as
the master-oscillator. The 1-nJ, 5-ns pulse that it generates is split and sent to 192 main
beamlines, where cascades of Nd**+-doped glass power amplifiers increase the pulse
energy to 20 kJ in each beamline.

MOPAs do have some disadvantages, aside from increased complexity. These in-
clude the possibility of amplifier-to-oscillator feedback and increased noise arising
from amplified spontaneous emission (ASE), but these effects can often be mitigated
by making use of optical isolators and by operating at saturation, respectively.
Ytterbium-Doped Silica-Fiber Lasers
Ytterbium-doped silica-fiber lasers offer excellent performance. Operating on the
252 —> °F7/2 transition (Fig. 16.3-2) аз quasi-three-level systems, double-clad
Yb*" :silica-fiber lasers pumped by InGaAs laser-diode arrays at Ло = 940 nm generate
light in the wavelength range 1020—1200 nm. At very low powers (P, < 1 W), the
use of short (few-cm-long) fibers provides linearly polarized single longitudinal- and
transverse-mode operation with laser linewidths in the kHz range. The laser linewidth
increases with increasing output power, reaching = 100 kHz at 100 W. Single fibers of
modest lengths can provide multi-kW output powers in the form of single-mode, near-
diffraction-limited beams (М? ~ 1.1). The 9% quantum defect leads to large power-
conversion efficiencies, 7. = 40%. These lasers can also be operated at high average
powers in Q-switched and mode-locked configurations (Sec. 16.40; Example 16.4-3).
Tandem pumping. An effective way of increasing the power of a fiber laser beyond
the multi-kW level is to make use of tandem pumping. In this technique, the output
of one or more double-clad fiber lasers pumps another fiber laser or a fiber amplifier.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 689
Using in-band pumping, the wavelength of the pump laser can be very close to that
of the pumped fiber, resulting in a small quantum defect. This, along with the low
divergence (high brightness) of the fiber laser pump, reduces heating and increases the
system wall-plug efficiency. The net result is the availability of high-power operation
using a reduced length of pumped fiber that offers a concomitant reduction in fiber
nonlinearity.
EXAMPLE 16.3-2. High-Power, Tandem-Pumped, CW УЬЗ+ :Silica-Fiber MOFA. An
example of tandem pumping in the form of a single-stage MOFA is provided by a 15-m-long
Yb?*:silica-fiber power-amplifier seeded by а 1-kW Yb*+:silica-fiber master-oscillator. Using in-
band pumping in the forward and backward directions, with 13 kW from Yb*+:silica-fiber lasers
operating at 1018 nm, this system produces 10 kW of optical power at 1070 nm in the form of a
single-mode, near-diffraction-limited optical beam. The power can readily be scaled up to 20 kW CW
and coherent beam combination can further boost the power to more than 30 kW CW in a single
mode. Incoherent beam combination yields in excess of 100 kW CW in multimode operation, with
М = 50.
Applications. Because of the many salutary features of ytterbium-doped fiber lasers
and MOFAs, they are commercially available with a range of output powers and they
find application in a broad variety of scientific and industrial venues. At low powers
(Ро = 1-100 W) these lasers are used for holography, interferometry, metrology,
spectroscopy, sensing, 3D lidar, and optical trapping. At medium powers (P, = 0.1-
1 kW) they find use for precision cutting, micro-drilling, micro/nanoscale machining,
and additive manufacturing. At high powers (Py = 1-20 kW), ytterbium-doped fiber
devices excel for materials processing and for cutting high-reflectance metals, while
at ultra-high power levels (P, > 20 kW) they are invaluable for welding, drilling,
precision cutting, annealing, and brazing.

High-power fiber lasers and MOFAs also find use as directed-energy weapons
(DEWs). They are generally superior to other types of lasers (e.g., chemical, solid-
state, and free-electron lasers) in this connection because of their high power, high ef-
ficiency, good beam quality, compactness, and immunity to vibrations and temperature
fluctuations. The efficacy of Yb°*:silica-fiber lasers in this capacity is demonstrated
by the U.S. Navy Laser Weapon System (LaWS). This system comprises six 5.5-kW
fiber lasers whose outputs are incoherently combined into a single 33-kW beam and
transmitted through a beam director. An advanced version delivers a 150-kW beam.
Erbium-Doped Silica-Fiber Lasers
Erbium-doped silica-fiber lasers owe their prominence to their progenitors, the erbium-
doped silica-fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) widely used in optical fiber communication sys-
tems (Secs. 15.3C and 25.1C). Operating on the “2,32 + “Т15/› transition as quasi-
three-level systems (Fig. 15.3-6), Er**:silica-fiber lasers pumped by strained-layer In-
GaAs laser-diode arrays at Ло = 980 nm lase in the vicinity of the conventional (С) and
long (L) telecommunications bands. The fibers are often co-doped with ytterbium to
increase efficiency and reduce fiber length. By virtue of its large cross section and high
doping density, Yb** is highly effective for absorbing the laser-diode pump radiation
and transferring the excitation energy to the Er?+ ions. Co-doping is also useful for
extending the wavelength range and for preventing erbium-ion clustering.

Narrow laser linewidths (= 1 kHz) are available when CW erbium-doped silica-
fiber lasers are operated at low power levels (P, = 10-1000 mW). At modest power
levels (Py < 10 W), single-frequency (FWHM laser linewidth = 50 kHz), linearly
polarized, diffraction-limited (М? = 1.1) operation is available in the wavelength
range 1530-1625 nm, with power-conversion efficiencies 7, = 10%. Multimode op-
eration (М? = 10) of an erbium-doped MOFA in the vicinity of 1567 nm (FWHM

690 — СНАРТЕВ 16 LASERS

linewidth = 400 GHz) offers substantially higher output powers (P, = 2—5 kW) along
with higher efficiencies (у, = 20%). Mode-locked operation at 1550 nm provides
5-и7 pulses of 500-fs duration at repetition rates up to 2 MHz, with peak powers
= 10 MW, average powers == 10 W, and М? = 1.4. These devices have applications
in telecommunications, metrology, sensing, polymer welding, non-metal cutting, and
low-loss power transmission.

The output power of the Er?*:silica-fiber laser is limited in comparison with that
available from the Yb**:silica-fiber laser, in part because of the difference in the
quantum defect q [see (15.2-32)], which is far larger for erbium (37%) than for yt-
terbium (9%). Though the quantum defect for erbium can be reduced to 5% by using
in-band pumping at 1480 nm, rather than quasi-three-level pumping at 980 nm, there
are concomitant disadvantages to doing so.

Thulium-Doped Silica-Fiber Lasers

Thulium-doped silica-fiber lasers operate at yet longer wavelengths, namely in the 1.8—
2.1-ита range, as quasi-three-level systems on the °F, — ЗНь transition. Double-clad
Tm** :silica-fiber lasers and MOFAs pumped by AlGaAs laser-diode arrays at Л, =
793 nm can generate output powers in excess of 500 W CW in the form of single-mode
(FWHM laser linewidth = 75 GHz), near-diffraction-limited (МР = 1.1) beams; linear
polarization can be obtained by operating at powers < 200 W. The output power can be
scaled up by making use of coherent beam combination. Multimode operation leads to
optical powers > 1 kW CW. Tunable pulsed operation in the wavelength range 1900-
2050 nm can deliver 1-mJ pulses of 1-ns duration at repetition rates up to 50 kHz, with
peak powers = 1 MW, average powers == 20 W, and М? ~ 1.1.

Cross-relaxation, in this case a salutary effect, results in the creation of two Tm?*
ions in the upper laser level for each absorbed pump photon. This in turn leads to a high
power-conversion efficiency, 7. = 35%, notwithstanding the large (96%) quantum
defect. Since light at a wavelength of = 2 ит is strongly absorbed by water and bio-
logical soft tissue, the thulium-doped fiber laser is useful for surgery and lithotripsy. It
is also suitable for remote sensing and for the processing of plastics that are transparent
in the visible region.

Comparison of Fiber and DPSS Lasers

Fiber lasers are most notably distinguished from diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS)
lasers (Sec. 16.3A) in that fiber resonators impose narrow lateral confinement and have
long lengths (Chapter 10). This latter feature can yield high optical gain even for transi-
tions with small gain coefficients. Another distinction is that the inhomogeneous broad-
ening associated with glass-fiber hosts generally leads to broader transition linewidths
than does the homogeneous broadening associated with crystalline or ceramic hosts.

Both classes of lasers provide high performance and both are expected to enjoy sub-
stantial further advances. It is useful, however, to highlight a few specific distinctions
between the two classes of lasers in the current state of their development:

In general, fiber lasers are superior to DSPP lasers by virtue of their:

= Higher output power (CW and pulsed).

= Higher power-conversion efficiency.

= Superior beam quality that persists to high-power operation.

= Superior immunity to thermal and vibrational effects.

= Superior performance on low-gain transitions.

On the other hand, DPSS lasers have the edge over fiber lasers because they offer:

= Reduced nonlinearities (smaller length and larger spatial extent of active region).

= Reduced stimulated Raman and stimulated Brillouin scattering.

= Broad wavelength tunability associated with vibronic lasers (e.g., Ti?+:sapphire).

= Possibility of using pump sources with poor beam quality.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 691
C. Raman Lasers

Raman fiber lasers (RFLs). These devices operate on the basis of stimulated
Raman scattering (SRS), a process considered in Sec. 14.5C and revisited in Sec. 15.3D
in connection with Raman fiber amplifiers (RFAs). The process of stimulated Raman
scattering is illustrated in Fig. 15.3-7: A signal photon of energy hv, stimulates the
emission of a clone signal photon that is obtained by Stokes-shifting the pump photon
by the Raman vibrational energy hv, so that the energy of the clone photon precisely
matches that of the initial signal photon. The optical gain of a RFA is governed by
the Raman gain coefficient y, set forth in (22.3-15); its bandwidth is determined by
the vibrational spectrum of the glass host, as described in Sec. 15.3D and illustrated in
Fig. 15.3-7.

Just as a rare-earth-doped fiber amplifier can be converted into a fiber laser by intro-
ducing optical feedback as shown in Fig. 16.3-4, so too can a Raman fiber amplifier be
converted into a Raman fiber laser (RFL). Fiber Bragg gratings serve as reflectors that
define the resonator, fostering oscillation at those frequencies where their reflectance
is large (Sec. 7.1C). Distributed-feedback (DFB) resonator configurations can also be
used (Sec. 18.3C). The oscillation frequency и; is reduced below the pump frequency
и, by the Stokes frequency vg, which can take on any value within the vibrational
spectrum of the glass host, as shown in Fig. 15.3-7. Though bulk Raman lasers were
demonstrated early on, fiber implementation brought Raman technology to the fore
for several reasons: 1) fibers offer long lengths and therefore large gains; 2) fibers
can support large intensities in a single-mode core; 3) fibers are efficiently pumped
by diode-pumped solid-state lasers; and 4) fibers readily accommodate multiple fiber
Bragg gratings. We emphasize that the Raman laser makes use of Raman gain, rather
than a population inversion and stimulated emission, so it differs from the usual laser
in an essential way.

Cascaded Raman fiber lasers. A unique feature of the Raman interaction is that
the Stokes shift is independent of the pump frequency. Indeed, the Stokes-shifted RFL
oscillation frequency generated using a resonator comprising a particular pair of fiber
Bragg gratings, say FBG1, can itself serve as a pump within the same fiber. As shown
in Fig. 16.3-5(a), this second pump, which has reduced frequency ил = Ир — Ив, can
then create a second-order Stokes-shifted oscillation, established at the frequency of
maximum reflectance 2 of a second pair of fiber Bragg gratings, FBG2.

Figure 16.3-5 (a) Cascaded Stokes
и ок tele shifts of multiple orders. (6) Schematic
hy of a Raman phosphosilicate-fiber laser.
, a aa n The double-clad Yb**:silica-fiber pump
(a) nw Wp laser is itself pumped by a laser-diode
hyp h array. Percentage values indicated below
h the FBGs represent power reflectances
at the specified wavelengths (in nm).
Ye eee Phosphosilicate fiber
-.-©,. „©
= ofS 8 SSS
100% 20% 100% 100% 50% 100%

(________- Pump laser ———————,__. \_ Raman wavelength shifter —-_—_—1
The cascade can continue, using nested pairs of FBGs, until terminated by the use of an
output coupler that directs light out of the fiber at the desired frequency. Raman fiber

692 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

lasers comprising multiple orders of Stokes shifts thus offer a greatly expanded range
of possible wavelengths. They are known as cascaded Raman fiber lasers.
ии |
EXAMPLE 16.3-3. Cascaded Raman Phosphosilicate-Fiber Laser. А cascaded Raman
fiber laser can be constructed by using a double-clad ytterbium-doped fiber laser that emits in the
1050-1120-nm region (Sec. 16.3B) as a pump for a 1-Кт length of phosphosilicate-fiber Raman
wavelength shifter, as depicted in Fig. 16.3-5(b). The Yb?*:silica-fiber pump laser, which is itself
pumped by a laser-diode array operating in the vicinity of 960 nm, emits single-mode light that can
be coupled into the single-mode Raman wavelength shifter more efficiently than can multimode light
from a laser-diode array. As a specific example, assume we wish to convert ytterbium-laser pump
light at 1064 nm (282 THz) to a longer wavelength, say 1484 nm (202 THz), so that the Raman fiber
laser can be used to pump a Raman fiber amplifier or an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (Sec. 15.3D).
Since we seek a significant frequency shift (80 THz), we make use of phosphosilicate fiber, which
has a large Stokes shift, vp = 40 THz, thereby enabling the desired frequency conversion using only
two Stokes orders. We could alternatively use germanium-doped silica fiber, but this would require
six Stokes orders since the Stokes shift for silica fiber is far smaller, и» ~ 13 THz, as is clear from
Fig. 15.3-7. As portrayed in Fig. 16.3-5(5), a first pair of fiber Bragg gratings, ЕВОТ, is used to shift
the 1064-nm pump light down by 40 THz in frequency to 1239 nm, while a second pair, FBG2, shifts
the light down another 40 THz in frequency to the desired wavelength of 1484 nm. The FBG1 pair
have reflectances of 100%, while the reflectance of one member of the FGB2 pair is reduced to 50%
so that light can be coupled out of the RFL at 1484 nm. A compact, commercially available RFL,
such as that shown in Fig. 16.3-5(6), can deliver tens of watts of single-mode CW optical power
with a bandwidth of = 2 nm at any desired wavelength within the range of 1100-1700 nm. The
power-conversion efficiencies of the ytterbium-doped fiber pump laser and the pump/Raman-shifter
combination are approximately 40% and 10%, respectively.
ПИ

The levels of optical power obtainable from Raman lasers can be extended to hun-
dreds of watts by making use of novel configurations, such as seed lasers in combina-
tion with Raman fiber amplifiers. Optical powers can be further increased to the multi-
kW regime by employing mixed rare-earth/Raman amplification in conjunction with
Yb?*-doped fibers. Raman fiber lasers are useful for many applications, including laser
pumping, optical fiber communications, supercontinuum generation, materials pro-
cessing, and clinical medicine. They are particularly suitable for pumping Raman fiber
amplifiers in dense wavelength-division-multiplexed (DWDM) systems and for the
remote pumping of erbium-doped fiber amplifiers. Ultralow-threshold, high-efficiency,
single-mode CW Raman lasers have also been fabricated using ultrahigh-Q toroidal
silica microcavities. The most attractive feature of a RFL is that oscillation over a
broad range of wavelengths is supported by suitable choice of the pump wavelength,
fiber material, and fiber Bragg gratings.

Stimulated Brillouin scattering [Fig. 14.5-5(d)] can be used in an analogous way to
construct Brillouin fiber lasers. The Brillouin frequency shift and bandwidth for silica
fibers are in the vicinity of 10 GHz and 100 MHz, respectively — these values are
orders of magnitude lower than those for the Raman frequency shift and bandwidth in
the same material.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 16.3-4. Silicon Raman Laser. Low-threshold, CW silicon Raman lasers that
operate at room temperature have been fabricated using integrated-optic-ring resonators on silicon
chips. Though Si has a high Raman gain coefficient, the substantial losses associated with free-
carrier absorption induced by two-photon absorption must be limited to achieve high gain. A Si
Raman laser of this kind has been implemented by using a 3-cm-long racetrack-shaped ring resonator
consisting of a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) rib waveguide [Fig. 9.3-5(d)] with a rib width of 1.5 ит.”

1 See H. Rong, S. Xu, Y.-H. Kuo, V. Sih, O. Cohen, O. Raday, and M. Paniccia, Low-Threshold Continuous-
Wave Raman Silicon Laser, Nature Photonics, vol. 1, рр. 232—237, 2007.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 693
Racetrack-shaped p-type and n-type regions, separated from each other by about 6 ит, hug the
outside and inside contours of the i-type rib-waveguide resonator, respectively. A reverse-bias field
applied between the doped regions serves to sweep out the electron—hole pairs generated by two-
photon absorption that are responsible for loss. A bus waveguide, connected to the resonator via an
integrated-photonic directional coupler, couples pump light at 1550 nm into the resonator and Raman
laser light at 1686 nm out of the resonator. An output power P, = 50 mW is obtained at a reverse
bias of 25 V, with an optical-to-optical slope efficiency 7, = 28% and a threshold optical pump
power P, = 20 mW. Even under zero-bias conditions, the output power is greater than 10 mW and
the threshold pump power is 26 mW. Silicon Raman lasers such as these can access wavelengths
substantially longer than the bandgap wavelength of Si (Ag = 1.11 jm), but they require auxiliary
pump lasers, which is challenging for silicon (see Sec. 17.1B).

Cascaded silicon Raman lasers have also been fabricated. In one example, a pump at 1550 nm
produces a Raman output at 1686 nm by virtue of a Stokes shift at vg = 15.6 THz, along with
an output at 1848 nm resulting from a second-order Stokes shift." The single-mode, CW output at
1848 nm has an optical power P, = 5 mW, a spectral width Av < 2.5 MHz, an optical-to-optical
slope efficiency 7, = 3%, and an optical-to-optical efficiency по = 1%. The threshold optical pump
power is P, = 120 mW.
ПИ
О. Random Lasers
As discussed in Secs. 16.1 and 16.2, the oscillation frequencies of conventional lasers
are determined by the Fabry—Perot resonator modes together with the gain profile of
the active-medium resonant transition. The output light, transmitted through a partially
reflecting exit mirror, typically has a narrow spectrum, strong directionality, and a high
degree of temporal and spatial coherence. Scattering from the laser medium introduces
loss and is assiduously avoided.

When scattering in the active medium is very strong, however, it itself can provide
feedback. Random lasers operate on the basis of feedback provided by multiple scat-
tering within a disordered gain medium, which serves as a closed 3D cavity. Photons
traveling within the medium can be viewed as executing a random walk in 3D or,
alternatively, the medium may be considered as a collection of low-Q cavities cou-
pled by the randomly scattered photons [Fig. 16.3-6(a)]. Because strong scattering is
associated with disordered media, lasers that operate on this principle are known as
random lasers. In distinction to conventional lasers, the radiation scattered back to
any location in the active medium has a random phase. The feedback is thus inco-
herent and intensity-based, rather than coherent and field-based. Inasmuch as resonant
feedback is absent in such random lasers, the central oscillation frequency is governed
by the active-medium gain profile. Random lasers can be implemented in 1D and 2D
geometries as well, corresponding to scattering media in the form of fibers and plates,
respectively.

When ground into powders, conventional solid-state laser materials such as ruby,
Nd?+:YAG, Nd?+:glass, Ti?*:sapphire, Cr?+:ZnSe, and GaAs can function as ran-
dom lasers known as powder lasers or plasers. In many such powders, the gain and
scattering media are one-and-the-same, but this is not the only possible configuration.
For example, rhodamine-6G dye molecules serve well as an active medium, while
АЪОз microparticles function as a scattering medium, when both are placed in a
solution of methanol. Random-laser active media encompass inorganic dielectrics,
polymers, liquids, dye solutions, dye-doped liquid crystals, disordered semiconductor
nanostructures, and even biological tissues.

Substantial gain can be attained in random lasers because of the large overall path-
length in the active medium that is engendered by the multiple scattering. The onset
of lasing is characterized by two lengths: 4х, which represents the mean distance

1 See H. Rong, S. Xu, O. Cohen, O. Raday, M. Lee, V. Sih, and M. Paniccia, A Cascaded Silicon Raman Laser,
Nature Photonics, vol. 2, рр. 170-174, 2008.

694 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
=
oo - о © - rye ‘> > ~
: »* © 100 nm
(a) (b)

Figure 16.3-6 (a) A random laser relies on incoherent and nonresonant feedback provided by
multiple scattering, as well as a long pathlength within the gain medium. The modes can be spatially
localized or extended, and both versions can contemporaneously coexist. Recurrent scattering
(illustrated schematically as loops) represents an alternative scenario in which the field repeatedly
retraces one or more local paths that collectively serve as a local cavity, thereby providing coherent
and resonant feedback. (b) Close-packed ZnO nanocrystallites serve as both the active medium and
the scattering feedback elements in a microrandom laser.
traveled by a photon before stimulating the net emission of a clone photon; and dx,
which is the mean distance traveled by a photon before it exits the medium. As the
scattering strength increases, so too does d.x. When the scattering increases to a level
such that Чех just equals +, each photon generates a clone photon, on average, before
escaping from the medium and a chain reaction of induced photon generation becomes
sustainable. Thus, the stronger the scattering, the lower the threshold pump power.

The hallmark of random lasers is the absence of directionality and spatial coher-
ence of the emitted light. Indeed, the spatial lasing pattern from the face of a cuvette
containing a powdered active medium can resemble that of a surface-emitting LED
[Fig. 18.1-11(а)]. However, random lasers share many properties in common with con-
ventional lasers, including their diversity. They can be pumped optically, electrically,
or by electron beam. Lasing can take place over a broad range of wavelengths. The
sizes of active regions can stretch from the microscopic to the macroscopic. Indeed,
feedback via scattering appears to play an important role in astrophysical masers, such
as those observed from molecular clouds of Н2О, OH, and SiO.

If the constituent particles of the active medium are sufficiently large and regularly
shaped so that they support resonator modes, they can behave instead as random col-
lections of individual microlasers, each with its own emission direction. Alternatively,
a local configuration of scatterers can support resonances. If the scattering is recurrent
[Fig. 16.3-6(a)], those return paths for which the optical gain exceeds the loss can serve
as cavities. The ensuing laser emission is then sharply peaked at these fortuitous cavity-
mode frequencies. Since different regions of the random medium support different
collections of such return paths, the oscillation frequencies depend on the particular
regions of the material being pumped and observed. Such lasers are sometimes called
coherent random lasers because of their coherent feedback and spatially random cav-
ity configurations; they are similar to collections of microlasers with random directions
of emission (conventional microcavity lasers are considered in Sec. 18.5).

Clusters of scatterers can be used to fabricate individual microrandom lasers, in
which light is confined to a volume of the order of a cubic wavelength by strong
scattering rather than by reflection, as illustrated in Example 16.3-5.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 16.3-5. ZnO Microrandom Laser. А closely packed collection of several thou-
sand ZnO nanocrystallites [Fig. 16.3-6(b)], each of the order of tens of nm in diameter, can coalesce
into a microcluster = 1 jzm in diameter. The nanocrystallites serve as both the gain medium and the
scattering feedback elements of a microrandom laser. The emission wavelength A, = 380 nm lies
near the bandgap wavelength of ZnO. Because the optical confinement arises from scattering, rather
than from reflection at the surface of the microcluster, such microlasers need not have regular shapes
and smooth surfaces.
«ПИ

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 695
E. Gas and Dye Lasers
Atomic and lonic Gas Lasers
Atomic and ionic gas lasers such as He-Ne, Аг", and Kr*, produce the beautiful
multicolored beams that were long a staple of optics laboratories (Table 16.3-1). The
Кг! -1юп laser, in particular, generates hundreds of milliwatts of optical power at wave-
lengths ranging from A, = 350 nm in the near-ultraviolet to 676 nm in the red. It can
be operated simultaneously on a number of lines to produce “white laser light.” Many
other monoatomic species, and their ions, also serve as active laser media and operate at
innumerable wavelengths in the near-infrared and visible regions. Nevertheless, atomic
and ionic gas lasers are now used principally for specialized applications since diode-
pumped solid-state lasers and laser diodes have far superior performance, aside from
being tunable and physically more robust.
Molecular Gas Lasers
Molecular gas lasers such as the СО. laser (Table 16.3-1 and Fig. 14.1-7), which lases
in the vicinities of Л, = 9.6 and 10.6 jm in the mid infrared, can produce kilowatts
of CW power with high efficiency, and has applications such as cutting, welding, and
engraving. In years past, a favorite in the far-infrared was the methanol (CH3OH) laser,
which oscillates at Л, = 119 and 124 wm as well as at myriad other wavelengths
(Table 16.3-1). Indeed, most molecular transitions in the infrared region can be made
to lase; even simple water vapor (Н2О) generates laser radiation at many wavelengths
in the far infrared (Table 16.3-1). In recent years, however, quantum cascade lasers
(QCLs) have come to the fore (Sec. 18.4D). Operating at room temperature and with
high power-conversion efficiencies, these devices produce watts of CW power in the
mid-infrared. QCLs have supplanted molecular lasers in essentially all applications,
save those requiring optical powers in excess of 10 W.
Excimer and Exciplex Lasers
Excimer and exciplex lasers are important in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum.
The term excimer, which is a contraction of the phrase “excited dimer,’ refers to a
short-lived molecule that contains two atoms in an excited electronic state; the term
exciplex is preferred when the two atoms are not identical. Noble-gas halides form
exciplexes because the chemical behavior of an excited noble-gas atom is similar to
that of an alkali atom, which readily reacts with a halogen. An example of an excimer
laser is Ро, which lases at 157 nm in the far ultraviolet. Examples of exciplex lasers,
along with their principal wavelengths of operation, are: ArF (193 nm), KrF (248 nm),
XeCl (308 nm), and XeF (351 nm) (Table 16.3-1). ArF exciplexes can be formed, for
example, by passing a 20-ns-duration current pulse through а gas mixture of Ar and F2
to create a gas discharge. As the exciplexes return to the ground state, they emit a 150-
mJ pulse of stimulated emission as the exciplex components dissociate (the individual
atoms often repel each other). Since a lower laser level does not exist, exciplex lasers
enjoy a built-in population inversion.

Since ultraviolet light does not penetrate deeply into most materials, exciplex lasers
find use in applications involving the processing of delicate materials. The UV light
from these lasers disrupts the molecular bonds at the surface of the material, vaporizing
it via ablation rather than by heating, burning, or cutting. This, along with the sub-
stantial energy per pulse that can be generated, makes exciplex lasers suitable for the
precision micromachining of polymers and for carrying out sensitive dermatological
and refractive surgeries. The most important application of ArF lasers is the fabrication
of microelectronic and photonic integrated circuits with feature sizes smaller than 10
nm. This is achieved by making use of optical lithography in conjunction with multiple
patterning and liquid-immersion techniques (to increase the numerical aperture). Fea-

696 CHAPTER16 LASERS

ture sizes continue to shrink as optical lithography migrates toward extreme-ultraviolet
and X-ray wavelengths. Other nanofabrication techniques include electron-beam and
focused ion-beam lithography.

Chemical Lasers

Chemiluminescence, the emission of light via a chemical reaction, is observed when
the reaction between two or more substances releases sufficient energy to populate
the excited state of a reaction product (Sec. 14.5A). Chemical lasers, which com-
prise mixtures of gases, are self-pumped in the sense that the pump energy derives
from a chemical reaction in the active medium itself. The HF laser, which delivers
megawatts of optical power in the 2.7—2.9-j4m wavelength range, is perhaps the best
known among this class of lasers. Its construction resembles that of a rocket engine:
it contains a combustion chamber, nozzles, gas-injection mechanisms, and a resonator.
As a simplified explanation of its operation, a mixture of Hz and F2 gases is subjected
to an electric discharge, which results in the production of an HF molecule in an excited
vibrational state, denoted HF*. This molecule emits an infrared photon and dissociates.
Its components in turn react with the Hz and Е> gases to create other vibrationally
excited molecules, creating a chain reaction of sorts. Other chemical lasers include the
“chemical oxygen-iodine laser’ (COIL) and the “all gas-phase iodine laser” (AGIL).

In earlier decades, the high power and good beam quality of chemical lasers made
them prime candidates for use as directed energy weapons (DEWs). In the end, how-
ever, they were found to be too bulky, too heavy, too inefficient, and too hazardous for
shipboard use. In recent years, attention has shifted toward solid-state, diode-pumped,
free-electron, and fiber lasers. Fiber lasers, in particular, are currently of substantial
interest for the development of DEWs because they offer high power, high efficiency,
good beam quality, compactness, and immunity to vibrations (Sec. 16.3B).
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 16.3-6. Deuterium Fluoride Chemical Laser. The most notorious chemical
laser, perhaps, is the U.S. Navy’s Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser (MIRACL), located at the
White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. This formidable DEW burns ethylene (C2H,) with
nitrogen trifluoride (NF3). The resulting free fluorine atoms combine with injected deuterium gas
to form vibrationally excited deuterium fluoride molecules, DF*. The photon emission, molecular
dissociation, and creation of new vibrationally excited molecules is similar to that in the HF laser.
However, the DF device lases on multiple lines in the 3.5-4.0-um wavelength range, which falls
within the MWIR atmospheric window so that its radiation is absorbed far less than that emitted
by the HF laser. The DF laser produces multi-megawatt levels of CW radiation over durations = 1
minute, in the form of a 14 cm x 14 cm square beam. It is the highest power CW chemical laser in
the Western Hemisphere.
ПИ
Dye Lasers
We include a brief description of organic dye lasers for completeness. Dye lasers
played a central role in optics and photonics in decades past because of their ability to
be tuned over a substantial range of wavelengths. The active medium of a dye laser is
generally a solution of an organic dye compound (a carbon-based fluorescent soluble
stain) in alcohol or water, with a concentration = 10~4 М. The dye solution is usually
rapidly circulated since organic dyes tend to decompose in the presence of light.

Dyes typically exhibit large transition linewidths, accommodating broad wavelength
tunability as well as ultrashort pulse generation with passive mode locking. Polyme-
thine dyes provide oscillation in the red and near infrared (0.7—1.5 wm), xanthene
dyes lase in the visible (500-700 nm), coumarin dyes lase in the violet, blue, and green
(390-500 nm), and scintillator dyes lase in the ultraviolet (< 390 nm). Rhodamine-6G,

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 697
the quintessential example of an active dye molecule, can be tuned over the wavelength
range 560-640 nm. Dye molecules can also be imbedded in a polymer, glass, or crys-
talline host to form a solid-state dye laser. Dye lasers are typically in-band pumped
(Fig. 14.1-8) with the help of an external laser such аз a doubled Nd?+:YAG laser or a
laser diode. Fabry—Perot and ring-laser resonators are the most prevalent designs, with
a prism or diffraction grating inserted in the beam path to provide wavelength tuning.

Unfortunately, dye lasers require high maintenance, in no small part because of the
limited chemical life of the dye in the solvent. As a result, diode-pumped solid-state
lasers (Sec. 16.3A) and laser diodes (Sec. 18.3) have by-and-large replaced the dye
laser, except in the most specialized of applications. The diode-pumped Ti** :sapphire
laser, for example, offers broader tunability than a typical dye laser in the vicinity
of Ло = 800 nm, and requires little maintenance. А frequency-doubled Ti:sapphire
laser offers a band of tunable radiation in the vicinity of 400 nm. Tunability near 600
nm, in the gap between 400 and 800 nm, can be achieved by frequency-doubling the
output of an optical parametric oscillator operating in the 1—2-4m wavelength region
(Sec. 22.2C).

F. X-Ray and Free-Electron Lasers

A number of approaches are commonly used to generate coherent light in the extreme-
ultraviolet (EUV) spectral band, as well as in the soft-X-ray (SXR) and hard-X-ray
(HXR) bands, which lie on the short-wavelength side of the EUV band. The y-ray
band comprises wavelengths yet shorter than those in the HXR band. The wavelengths
and photon energies of these bands are presented in Fig. 16.3-7.

0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000 — Photon energy

eee

perry т | ИИ, т | ИВ т | т | т | 5
100 nm 10 nm lnm 1A 0.1А 0.01A Wavelength
Figure 16.3-7 Wavelengths and photon energies for the extreme ultraviolet (EUV), soft-X-ray
(SXR), hard-X-ray (HXR), and y-ray spectral bands. The boundaries dividing the various bands are
somewhat arbitrary. However, for concreteness we set the boundary between the EUV and SXR bands
at \, = 10 nm and the boundary between the SXR and HXR bands at A, = 0.2 nm. The Angstrém
length scale is widely used in the X-ray literature (1 А = 10-10 т = 0.1 nm). The photon energy is
related to the wavelength via E(keV) = 1.24/,(nm), in accordance with (13.1-6).

We begin with a discussion of coherent X-ray generation using atomic EUV and
X-ray lasers. Two other methods are also widely used for generating coherent X-rays:
X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs), which use particle accelerators to provide pulse
energies in the mJ range, as discussed subsequently; and high-harmonic generation
(HHG), which provides pulse energies in the и] range and is examined in Sec. 23.5D.
HHG systems are compact and versatile; individual spectral and/or temporal compo-
nents can be extracted by the use of gating techniques.

Atomic EUV and X-Ray Lasers

Using atomic transitions to achieve laser action in the X-ray region of the electro-
magnetic spectrum is a challenging enterprise because of the difficulty of achieving a
population inversion at short wavelengths. According to (16.1-16), for a fixed value
of tsp, the threshold population difference № o 1/т, А? g(v). Since a photon of
energy Е = hc/X is required to pump each atom, the threshold pump power density is
proportional to 1/7, АЗ g(v). When Doppler broadening prevails, as is often the case

698 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

in these media, (14.3-42) and (14.3-43) provide that g(v) сх A, so that the threshold
pump power density is proportional to 1/7, \*. Since 1/A“ increases rapidly as the
wavelength moves toward the X-ray region, it becomes increasingly difficult to supply
sufficient pump power to attain laser threshold.

Another challenging aspect of achieving laser action at X-ray wavelengths is cen-
tered on the difficulty of constructing suitable optical components. This is the case both
because the absorption coefficient is large (which decreases the photon lifetime 7, and
thus further increases N,) and because the refractive index is close to unity in most
materials in the X-ray region. Nevertheless, a number of X-ray optical components
have been successfully implemented and are available:

= Grazing-Incidence Optics. Since X-ray frequencies lie well above the plasma

frequency, metals exhibit a refractive index that lies just below unity (Sec. 8.2A
and Fig. 8.2-3). Total internal reflection can therefore be achieved and metals can
serve as mirrors. This is possible only near grazing incidence, however, because
the small refractive-index contrast requires a large angle of incidence (the situ-
ation is analogous to that at the boundary between the core and cladding of a
planar dielectric waveguide). Nevertheless, X-rays can be focused to nanometer-
scale spots using grazing-incidence deformable mirrors that allow for wavefront
correction, as well as by making use of other techniques.

= Multilayer Optics. The construction of multilayer-optical devices is more сот-

plex than in the visible region because the refractive index is close to unity and
does not vary appreciably from one material to another. In accordance with (6.2-
15), the normal-incidence Fresnel reflectance at a vacuum/material interface, R =
[((1—n)/(1+n)]?, is typically < 10“. Nevertheless, high-reflectance multilayer
mirrors can be fabricated by making use of stacks that contain a large numbers
of layers (Sec. 7.1), although this number is ultimately restricted by the limited
penetration depth into the stack. As an example, a multilayer mirror comprising
tens of alternating layers of Si and Mo can provide normal-incidence reflectance
А 70% at A, = 13.5 nm. The optimization of reflectance at certain wavelengths
can be fostered by constructing stacks of three materials rather than two, and
by relying on biperiodic and aperiodic structures. Other special design criteria
are necessary for the design of components that accommodate femtosecond and
attosecond X-ray pulses. Multilayer optics can also be incorporated in grazing-
incidence configurations and in zone-plate structures.

= Gratings. Gratings are useful for selecting narrowband wavelength slices from

continuous-wavelength X-ray sources (e.g., synchrotron radiation) as well as for
selecting individual harmonic components from line-spectrum X-ray sources such
as those generated by high-harmonic generation. They are also useful for pulse
shaping and compression (Sec. 23.2). Plane and concave gratings are often ruled
with triangular groove profiles.
In spite of the severity of these limitations, they were overcome in 1980 when X-ray
laser action was first achieved in a dramatic experiment carried out by researchers
at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL). An underground nuclear
detonation, dubbed Dauphin, created a flux of incoherent X-rays sufficiently strong
that it was able to achieve a population inversion by pumping the atoms in an assembly
of metal rods. A coherent X-ray laser pulse was generated and detected — just before
the apparatus was vaporized by the detonation. It is worth mentioning that since HHG
sources are not lasers, the generation of coherent X-rays via HHG is not subject to the
limitations discussed above.

We now examine two practical approaches for implementing atomic EUV and X-ray
lasers in the laboratory: 1) atomic ionization using focused laser beams; and 2) atomic
inner-shell photopumping. This is followed by a brief discussion of a number of appli-
cations that make use of atomic X-ray lasers.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 699
Focused-laser-beam atomic ionization. Highly ionized atoms can be formed by
focusing short-duration, high-intensity laser pulses in the IR, visible, or UV onto a solid
target to directly generate a hot ionized-atom plasma. Coherent X-ray radiation can
then be generated via recombination or collisional excitation. A downward electron
transition in a highly ionized atom produces a high-energy photon that in turn can
induce the emission of a clone photon from a nearby ion via stimulated emission.
Because it is difficult to construct resonators with X-ray feedback at these short wave-
lengths, many X-ray lasers operate on the basis of amplified stimulated emission (ASE,
Sec. 15.5). An EUV laser of this form that operates at a wavelength of 18.2 nm via
plasma recombination was first reported in hydrogen-like carbon (СЗТ) in the mid-
1980s, as detailed in Example 16.3-7.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 16.3-7. Hydrogen-Like Carbon EUV Laser. The carbon-plasma laser provides
a didactic example of an EUV laser that operates on the basis of focused-laser-beam atomic ioniza-
tion and recombination. In an experiment carried out at Princeton University in 1985, a 10.6-ит-
wavelength СО. laser pulse, of 300-J energy and 50-ns duration, with a peak power of 6 GW, was
focused onto a solid carbon disk.’ The infrared-laser pump pulse generated sufficient heat to strip all
of the electrons from some of the carbon atoms, thereby creating a plasma of ionized carbon, which
was radially confined by the use of a magnetic field. The cooling of the plasma at the termination of
the pump pulse led to the capture of electrons in the n = 3 shells, and simultaneously to a dearth of
electrons in the n = 2 shells because of fast radiative decay to the ground state. The net result was a
collection of hydrogen-like C°*+ ions with a population inversion (Fig. 14.1-1).

As expected from (14.1-4), the decay of an electron from the п = 3 to the n = 2 shell (the 3d— 2p

transition has the largest cross section) is accompanied by the emission of a photon of energy
M,Z7e* 1 1

Е= ВЕР (> =) (16.3-1)
With Z = 6 this corresponds to an EUV photon of energy 68 eV at a wavelength Л. = 18.2 nm. In
the ionized-carbon experiment, a spontaneously emitted photon (t,, = 12 ps) initiated the stimulated
emission of EUV photons from other ions, resulting in ASE (other transition parameters are provided
in Table 15.3-1). The single-pass gain-coefficient-length product yd was found to be = 6 so that, in
accordance with (15.1-7), the gain was G == e®. The output was a 20-ns pulse of EUV ASE with a
power of 100 kW, an energy of 2 mJ, and a divergence of © 5 mrad. Similar results were obtained by
using Nd?*: glass laser excitation at 1.06 zm.
ПИ

Typical active media that are used for hot-plasma atomic EUV and X-ray lasers are
Ne-like or Ni-like highly ionized atoms, which offer the most stable electron config-
urations. In 1985, EUV lasers that made use of collisional excitation were reported
in Ne-like selenium (Se?**) and in Ne-like yttrium (Y?°*), at wavelengths near 21
nm and 16 nm, respectively. Not too long thereafter, in the late 1980s, the 1.06-ym
NOVA Nd?*:glass laser system at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory was used
to vaporize thin foils of tantalum and tungsten metal, creating Ni-like Ta*°+ and Ni-
like W*°r ions respectively, and generating 250-ps SXR laser pulses at wavelengths as
short as Ло = 4.3 nm.

A common pumping configuration employs a cylindrical lens that focuses the pump
light onto the target in the form of a thin line, generating a column of plasma that
serves as a length of active region. Pumping is often provided by a Ti**:sapphire
laser operating near 800 nm, or by the fundamental, second, or third harmonic of a
Nd?*:glass laser, at 1053, 526, or 351 nm, respectively. The use of sequential pump
pulses can enhance the population inversion, thereby improving efficiency and permit-
ting laser operation in the saturated-gain regime. Delivering the main pump pulse at

1 See 5. Suckewer, С. Н. Skinner, H. Milchberg, С. Keane, and О. Voorhees, Amplification of Stimulated Soft
X-Ray Emission in a Confined Plasma Column, Physical Review Letters, vol. 55, pp. 1753-1756, 1985.

700 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

grazing incidence increases the absorption and reduces the required pump energy since
it effectively provides traveling-wave pumping, thereby increasing the path length of
the light in the plasma gain medium. Furthermore, injecting light from a low-noise,
coherent seed laser into the device causes it to behave as an amplifier and to produce
amplified coherent emission rather than amplified spontaneous emission. Desirable
characteristics of the seed, such as high coherence, can then be transferred to the X-
ray laser, resulting in output pulses with high spatial and temporal coherence, low
divergence, and a defined polarization. The salutary features discussed here are all
exhibited by the Ni-like Ag'®* EUV laser considered in Example 16.3-8.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 16.3-8. Nickel-Like Silver EUV Laser. Plasma-based, collisionally excited,
atomic EUV lasers have been operated at 13.9 nm on the 44 15% + 4p 'P, transition in Ni-like Ag!®*.

In the unseeded configuration, pumping was provided by a mode-locked, amplified, 800-nm
ТЗ :sapphire laser that generated ps-duration main heating pulses of © 1 J energy. These pulses were
directed to a silver target at grazing incidence to form a 4 mm x 30 ит line of Ag!®* plasma." The
small-signal gain coefficient was 67.5 cm! and the gain-coefficient-length product was yd ~ 16.8.
The resulting 13.9-nm gain-saturated ASE pulses had duration = 5 ps, energy = 85 ИТ, average
power = 2 и\, divergence = 8 mrad, and a repetition rate of 5 Hz.

When injection-seeded with pulses from a source of high-harmonic generation (Sec. 23.5D), a
similar device generated amplified coherent emission with properties superior to those obtained in
the unseeded configuration. The dense Ag'®+ plasma was created by irradiating a polished silver
slab with a main heating pulse of 6.7-ps duration and = 1 J епегоу.* Produced by an amplified
Ti*+:sapphire laser operating at 815 nm, the heating pulse impinged on the sample at grazing inci-
dence to form a 4.1 mm x 30 рим line of plasma. The HHG seed was generated by focusing 20-mJ
laser pulses compressed to 50-fs duration, obtained from the Ti?+:sapphire pump laser, into Ne gas
at 20 torr (Example 23.5-4). The seed pulse at 13.9 nm, consisting of the 59th harmonic of the HHG,
was injected into the amplifier | ps after the heating pulse; gain saturation was reached after 3 mm
of propagation. The EUV laser amplified the seed pulse by a factor of 200 and generated ps-duration
output pulses with an energy of = 50 nJ and a divergence = 1 mrad. The repetition rate was 5 Hz.
The pulse duration can be reduced below 1 ps by making use of collisional-ionization gating.
«ПИ

Other approaches for achieving ionized-atom-plasma lasing include current-pulse
and field-induced atomic ionization. The medium can be excited by a strong electri-
cal pulse to create a hot plasma; capillary-confined plasmas can be used to produce
saturated lasing in a compact configuration. The active medium can alternatively be
directly ionized by laser-driven optical field effects and multiphoton processes, which
give rise to a cold, dense collection of ionized atoms surrounded by a hot electron
distribution, in which case collisional excitation is initiated by the emitted electrons
rather than by the thermalized particles in a heated plasma.

Inner-shell photopumping. The techniques for achieving lasing in the EUV and
SXR regions considered above are based on recombination or collisional excitation
into excited states of highly ionized atoms in a plasma. An alternative approach, made
possible by the advent of the X-ray free-electron laser (XFEL, Fig. 16.3-8), relies on
the photopumping of neutral atoms that results in the photoionization of atomic inner-
shell electrons. Photopumping leaves the lower laser level unpopulated, and as such
results in the direct production of a population inversion. However, since the population

1 See У. Wang, М. А. Larotonda, В. М. Luther, D. Alessi, М. Веги, У. М. Shlyaptsev, and J. J. Rocca,
Demonstration of High-Repetition-Rate Tabletop Soft-X-Ray Lasers with Saturated Output at Wavelengths Down
to 13.9 nm and Gain Down to 10.9 nm, Physical Review A, vol. 72, 053807, 2005.

* See У. Wang, Е. Granados, Е. Pedaci, D. Alessi, В. Luther, М. Berrill, and J. J. Rocca, Phase-Coherent,
Injection-Seeded, Table-Top Soft-X-Ray Lasers at 18.9 nm and 13.9 nm, Nature Photonics, vol. 2, pp. 94-98,
2008.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS — 701
inversion disappears at the expiration of the lifetime of the core-excited state, the laser
action is self-terminating. Though this lifetime is short as a result of fast radiative
decay from higher energy levels and nonradiative Auger recombination (Fig. 17.1-
18), a population inversion can nevertheless be attained by making use of an XFEL,
which is an ultrafast, coherent X-ray-laser pump of sufficient power to allow inner-
shell photoionization to take place on a timescale comparable with the lifetime of the
core-excited state. This pumping scheme bears some similarity to in-band pumping.

Though it requires an XFEL pump, which is hardly found in every laboratory, the
inner-shell photopumping approach has a number of merits: 1) the pump energy is
directed exclusively to the transition of interest, thereby avoiding inefficiencies asso-
ciated with the excitation of extraneous states; 2) the laser radiation is spatially well-
matched to the pump; and 3) the pump XFEL, when configured for dual-frequency
operation, can provide an auxiliary seed.
ини |
EXAMPLE 16.3-9. XFEL-Pumped Neon Inner-Shell SXR Laser. Laser emission at
1.46 nm (Epnoton = 849 eV) is generated by an inner-shell-photopumped atomic Ne X-ray laser
pumped by an XFEL (Example 16.3-11) that operates at a wavelength of 1.29 nm (Epnoton = 960
eV).' Neon is a closed-shell noble gas, with ten electrons (Z = 10) and the ground-state electron
configuration Ne:1s?2s?2p°. An XFEL pump photon photoionizes an electron from the inner (п = 1)
shell, also known аз the К shell. This results in a singly ionized neon ion (Ne*: 181282216) that serves
as the upper laser level. The laser transition Ne+:1s'2s?2p° — Ne*:1s?2s?2p° is associated with
the radiative recombination of an electron from the outer (n = 2) shell, also called the L shell, with
the core hole in the К shell. X-rays resulting from п = 2 — п = 1 transitions are, by convention,
called Ka X-rays. Though a competing Auger transition (which has а short 2.4-fs lifetime and thus
is exceptionally strong) is available from the upper laser level, №+:1812522р6 — Ne?*:1522s?2p4,
a residual 1.8% probability of spontaneous radiative decay at 1.46 nm on the laser transition is
nevertheless sufficient to achieve lasing. The traditional atomic Ne laser lines in the visible and
infrared regions of the spectrum (Fig. 14.1-2) arise from valence-electron transitions lying exclusively
within the n = 2 shell.

In an experiment carried out in 2012 at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, XFEL pump
pulses (energy ~ 0.02 to 0.27 mJ, duration == 50 fs, and maximum intensity == 2 x 10!" W/cm?) were
focused (spot size = 1 ила) into a gas cell containing a volume of neon atoms (pressure == 500 torr)
to create a long, narrow column of transiently core-excited ions. Photons that were spontaneously
emitted (t,, = 130 fs) near the front end of the column initiated ASE that increased exponentially
along the path of the XFEL pulse, which served to prepare atoms in the excited state just as the
Ne Ka ASE from previously excited atoms arrived. Some characteristic parameters associated with
this transition are provided in Table 15.3-1.

The emitted SXR ASE pulses had energy = 1 и, duration = 5 fs, divergence = 1 mrad, and an
energy conversion efficiency = 4 x 10-3. The single-pass gain coefficient was = 65 cm! and the
gain-coefficient—-length product was yd = 18. Doubling the incident XFEL pulse energy from 0.12
to 0.24 mJ increased the output pulse energy by a factor of 10*. The laser line exhibited a Lorentzian
lineshape with a width of 0.27 eV that resulted principally from lifetime broadening associated with
the Auger transitions. The low operating temperature and low Ne gas density rendered the effects
of Doppler and collisional broadening negligible; indeed, the observed linewidth was substantially
narrower than that attainable with plasma-based X-ray lasers. Globally speaking, the neon inner-
shell-photopumped X-ray laser served to convert the fluctuating self-amplified spontaneous emission
(SASE) radiation from the pump XFEL into a highly stable, narrowband, coherent X-ray source, a
transformation reminiscent of the operation of diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers (Sec. 16.3A).
EXAMPLE 16.3-10. _XFEL-Pumped and Seeded Copper Inner-Shell HXR Laser. The
operation of the XFEL-pumped copper inner-shell laser is similar to that of the XFEL-pumped neon
inner-shell laser (Example 16.3-9), but it offers two additional important features: 1) it operates in
the HXR rather than in the SXR band; and 2) it can be operated in a seeded configuration by making

1 See М. Rohringer, О. Ryan, R. А. London, М. Purvis, Е. Albert, J. Dunn, J. D. Bozek, С. Bostedt, A. Graf,
R. Hill, S. P. Hau-Riege, and J. J. Rocca, Atomic Inner-Shell X-Ray Laser at 1.46 Nanometres Pumped by an
X-Ray Free-Electron Laser, Nature, vol. 481, pp. 488-491, 2012.

702 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
use of a dual-frequency XFEL pump. Laser emission on the Cu Ka line at 1.54 А (Е photon = 8.0
keV) from а 20-j:m-thick copper foil is obtained by inner-shell photopumping with a HXR XFEL
operating at 1.4 A (Ephoton = 8.9 keV).* Various parameters associated with this transition are set
forth in Table 15.3-1. When an auxiliary spectral component provided by the XFEL was used to seed
the laser, the amplification was augmented by a factor of about 100 and the temporal coherence was
improved considerably.
ини |
Applications of EUV and X-ray lasers. EUV and X-ray laser applications include
nanolithography for semiconductor manufacturing, nanopatterning, nanoimaging,
plasma diagnostics, medical imaging, high-resolution spectroscopy, nonlinear X-ray
optics, and the dynamic imaging and holography of biological samples.
Free-Electron Lasers
The free-electron laser (FEL) makes use of an accelerator-generated relativistic elec-
tron beam that is passed through a channel between two opposing rows of stationary
magnets of alternating polarity known as an undulator or wiggler (Fig. 16.3-8). The
electron beam serves as the pump for the FEL and its interaction with the generated
electromagnetic field serves as the active medium. The appellation “free-electron laser”
signifies that, unlike the situation in most other lasers, the electrons are not bound in
atoms or molecules. Since the motion of the electrons is affected by both the wiggler
and the generated field, however, the description “free” is not totally apt.
Undulator 5
Electron a! ©
beam
— Mirror
Mirror | |
Figure 16.3-8 Schematic of a free-electron laser (FEL) oscillator. The undulator creates a periodic
magnetic flux density, typically with a magnitude in the vicinity of 1 Т. It usually has a centimeter-
scale spatial period and contains anywhere from tens to thousands of periods, so that its total
longitudinal length is somewhere between meters and tens of meters. The electron beam, with a
radius of millimeters, is guided into the undulator by bending magnets. The electron-beam current
typically ranges from amperes to kiloamperes while the electron energy varies from MeV to GeV.
The pulse duration of the emitted radiation, which follows that of the electron pulse, varies from
femtoseconds to microseconds. Both spontaneous and stimulated emission occur; in wavelength
regions where resonators can be fabricated, mirrors can be used to foster oscillation. Such an FEL
oscillator might use a mirror separation d about twice the length of the undulator and might support
an optical beam with a waist of millimeters. However, FELs can also be operated on the basis of a
single pass through an undulator, an approach that is particularly useful in the X-ray region, where it
is difficult to fabricate mirrors.

The undulator produces a periodic transverse static magnetic wiggler field, which,
with proper design of the pole pieces, can be made nearly sinusoidal in space near
the axis of the undulator. The wiggler field in turn causes the electrons to undergo
nearly sinusoidal transverse oscillations. Relativistic electrons forced to accelerate or
decelerate under the action of a magnetic field emit synchrotron radiation in a narrow

1 See H. Yoneda, У. Inubushi, К. Nagamine, У. Michine, H. Ohashi, H. Yumoto, К. Yamauchi, H. Mimura,
H. Kitamura, T. Katayama, T. Ishikawa, and M. Yabashi, Atomic Inner-Shell Laser at 1.5-Angstrém Wavelength
Pumped by an X-Ray Free-Electron Laser, Nature, vol. 524, pp. 446—449, 2015.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 703
cone tangential to the electron trajectory in the forward direction. This radiation, while
rendered narrowband by the undulator, is incoherent because of constructive and de-
structive interference among the waves emitted by the randomly distributed electrons.

The lasing process can be initiated by the spontaneous emission at the entrance
to the undulator associated with the inherent electron-position fluctuations (electron
shot noise). Because the electrons are highly relativistic and move essentially at the
speed of light, they copropagate with the radiation they generate and remain coupled
to it over long distances, thereby allowing the spontaneous synchrotron radiation to
grow. When this radiation becomes sufficiently strong, its transverse field interacts with
the transverse component of the electron current. This causes some electrons to lose
energy to the field, while others gain energy, via the ponderomotive force associated
with the electric field, У» = —(e?/4mow")V(E*), where w and & are the angular
frequency and amplitude of the oscillating field, respectively. This in turn gives rise to
successive microbunches of electrons separated by an optical wavelength along the axis
of the undulator, and hence to emissions that are coherent with the phase of the field.
The net result is a saturated power many orders of magnitude greater than that of the
synchrotron radiation. This route to lasing is known as a self-amplified spontaneous
emission (SASE). Alternatively, the lasing process can be initiated by seeding the FEL
with a radiation field in resonance with it, whereupon the FEL acts as an amplifier. The
seed may be generated by the FEL itself (self-seeding) or by an external source, such
as high-harmonic generation.

The wavelength of the on-axis light emitted by a free-electron laser is expressible
as

2

Aven © Au (1 + >) , (16.3-2)
277 2 Free-Electron Laser
Emission Wavelength
where A, is the spatial period of the undulator and y = 1/\/1 — у2/с2 = Eveam/moc?
is the relativistic Lorentz factor; the electron rest energy moc? = 0.511 MeV. The
undulator (magnetic-deflection) parameter is expressible as К = eBA,/27m0Co,
where З is the magnetic flux density. The FEL emission wavelength expressed in
(16.3-2) is of the form Apu, oc Ay/7?. The physical underpinnings of this relation can
be understood by recognizing that App, is matched to a scaled version of the undulator
period Ла, where the scaling factor 1/7? is imposed by the requirements of relativity.
One factor of 1/¥ arises from the length contraction of the undulator spatial period
in the rest frame of the relativistic electron, while the other factor of 1/y arises from
the time dilation of the emitted radiation in the laboratory frame, corresponding to the

relativistic Doppler shift.

In accordance with (16.3-2), decreasing the spatial period of the undulator Л, results
in a decrease of the wavelength of the emitted light Лььь, as does decreasing the
strength of the magnetic flux density B embedded in the undulator parameter kK. As
the energy of the electron beam Еъсаш increases, so too does the electron velocity v
and the Lorentz factor у, which also lead to a decrease in the wavelength of the emitted
radiation. Individual FELs can thus provide a broad range of operating wavelengths by
tuning the electron-beam energy Epeam, undulator period Ла, and undulator parameter
К. Because they operate in a vacuum, high peak powers can be attained without
incurring material damage and encountering thermal lensing effects. Moreover, the
gain medium is transparent at all wavelengths. Though they are highly complex and
require large and expensive facilities, FELs can offer unrivaled power and performance,
particularly in wavelength regions that are difficult to reach using other lasers.

Free-electron lasers operate across much of the electromagnetic spectrum, including
the millimeter-wave, infrared, visible, ultraviolet, and X-ray bands. Many facilities

704 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
have multiple FELs and beamlines. Representative examples of FEL facilities in vari-
ous spectral regions include:

= mm-wave/FIR: The electrostatic FEL at the University of California at Santa

Barbara operates at wavelengths that stretch from 2.5 mm to 63 ит.

= IR/Visible/UV: The iFEL 1-5 LINAC FEL at Osaka University operates at wave-

lengths extending from 100 рим to 230 nm.

= NUV/MUV: The ОК4 storage-ring FEL at Duke University operates at wave-

lengths that extend from 400 nm to 193 nm.

= EUV: The FERMI LINAC FEL at Elettra Sincrotrone Trieste operates at wave-

lengths between 100 nm and 4 nm.

= SXR/HXR: The Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) LINAC FEL at the SLAC

National Accelerator Laboratory at Stanford University operates at wavelengths

that stretch from 44 A to 1.1 A.
X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs). As discussed above, free-electron lasers can
operate in the X-ray region by making use of high electron-beam energies and small
undulator periods. Because of the difficulty of constructing laser resonators in the X-
ray band, XFELs often operate using a single pass through a long undulator and rely on
self-amplified spontaneous emission (SASE) or injection seeding; the latter approach
typically provides superior performance in terms of output power and temporal co-
herence. Today’s XFELs are typically driven by kilometer-scale linear accelerators
(LINACs), which offer more energetic and brighter X-ray beams than those available
from devices in which the electrons circulate, such as synchrotrons and electron storage
rings. Efforts are underway to reduce the lengths of XFELs from kilometers to meters
by coupling tabletop accelerators that make use of plasma wakefield acceleration
(PWFA) or laser wakefield acceleration (LWFA)' with undulators and compact elec-
tron guns. Though ultrafast SXR pulses are available from high-harmonic generation,
as mentioned earlier, XFELs can provide harder, and far more energetic, X-ray pulses.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 16.3-11. Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) XFEL. The Linac Coherent
Light Source (LCLS) at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory (SLAC) is a 1-km-long SASE
free-electron laser that generates ultrafast hard-X-ray pulses at a repetition rate of 120 Hz.* Its (Nd-
Fe-B) permanent-magnet undulator, comprising 33 3.4-m-long sections, has an overall active length
of 112 m. The undulator period is A, = 3 cm and the magnetic-deflection parameter is K = 3.5,
corresponding to a peak magnetic wiggler field of 1.25 T. The LCLS makes use of an electron beam
whose energy is adjustable over the range 2.5 < Epeam < 15.9 GeV, corresponding to a Lorentz
factor y = Еъеаш/ (0.511 MeV) that can be adjusted over the range 4892 < y < 31115. Using
(16.3-2), this corresponds to laser operation over the wavelength range 4.4 > Ape, > 0.11 nm
(44 > pw > 1.1 A). The LCLS produces coherent X-ray pulses of energy = 2 mJ, duration
between 2 and 500 fs (FWHM), peak power == 20 GW, intensity = 1021 W/cm?, and average power
А 200 mW. The peak brightness is some 10 orders of magnitude greater than that available using a
conventional, incoherent synchrotron source. Multipulse and multicolor lasing, with fixed or variable
time and/or wavelength separation, is incorporated in the system, as is polarization control. Self-
seeding and external-seeding capabilities provide increased power and improved temporal coherence.

The pulse repetition rate of the LCLS is limited to 120 Hz to avoid damage to the LINAC’s copper
cavities. High pulse repetition rate greatly facilitates imaging by increasing the number of image

1 See, e.g., Е. Albert, Laser Wakefield Accelerators: Next Generation Light Sources, Optics & Photonics News,
vol. 29, по. 1, pp. 42-49, 2018.

* See P. Emma, R. Akre, J. Arthur, R. Bionta, C. Bostedt, J. Bozek, A. Brachmann, P. Bucksbaum, R. Coffee,
F-J. Decker, У. Ding, О. Dowell, $. Edstrom, A. Fisher, J. Frisch, 5. Gilevich, J. Hastings, С. Hays, Ph. Hering,
7. Huang, В. Iverson, H. Loos, М. Messerschmidt, A. Miahnahri, S. Moeller, H.-D. Nuhn, G. Pile, О. Ratner,
J. Rzepiela, О. Schultz, Т. Smith, Р. Stefan, H. Tompkins, J. Turner, J. Welch, W. White, J. Wu, С. Yocky, and
J. Galayda, First Lasing and Operation of an Angstrom-Wavelength Free-Electron Laser, Nature Photonics, vol. 4,
pp. 641-647, 2010.

16.3 TYPESOFLASERS 705
samples that can be collected in a fixed period of time. The European XFEL at Deutsches Elektronen-
Synchrotron (DESY) Hamburg, commissioned in 2017, operates at an average repetition rate of
27 kHz by virtue of its superconducting linear accelerator. This FEL generates HXR radiation in the
form of clusters of 2 700 pulses separated by 220 ns, periodically repeated at a rate of 10 Hz. Because
of its high pulse repetition rate, this 3.4-km-long, 17.5-GeV, SASE FEL has an average power and
brightness nearly 1000 times greater than that of the LCLS. In 2021, a new superconducting-LINAC
FEL, dubbed LCLS-II, will come online at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. Among other
advances, it will support a pulse repetition rate of 1 MHz.
ПИ
XFEL applications. The XFEL serves as a source of energetic, ultrafast, and coher-
ent X-rays. Because the short-wavelength pulses emitted are brief and bright, XFELs
have facilitated the imaging and filming of physical, chemical, and biological struc-
tures and processes at unprecedented spatial and temporal scales. The XFEL has also
expedited the study of non-periodic systems, non-crystalline states, non-equilibrium
dynamical processes, and nonlinear X-ray phenomena. With spatial resolution at the
A-scale and temporal resolution at the fs-scale, XFEL imaging has elucidated the inner
workings of processes in photonics, materials science, and medicine.

A pulsed radiation source suitable for high-resolution, spatiotemporal imaging has
a number of requirements that are accommodated by XFELs:

= Temporal and spatial coherence for coherent imaging. Spatial coherence is ас-

commodated for SASE operation and temporal coherence is accommodated for
seeded operation.

= Temporal resolution at the atomic scale (Bohr period То = 150 as). Pulse dura-

tions = 1 fs are currently accommodated; the generation of attosecond pulses is
under development.

= High energy and шей peak power. Pulses with mJ energies and peak powers of

tens of GW are currently accommodated; beams at photon energies > 50 keV are
being planned.

= High average power for rapid image accumulation. Pulse repetition rates of tens

of kHz are currently accommodated; rates up to 1 MHz are under development.
= Spatial resolution at the atomic scale (Bohr radius ag = 0.53 A). Focusing to
nm-scale spot sizes is currently accommodated.

= High intensity to facilitate extreme nonlinear X-ray interactions. Pulse intensities

as high аз == 1021 W/cm? are currently accommodated.

= Multicolor and multipulse operation. Pulses with fixed or variable wavelength

and/or time separation are accommodated.

XFELs offer unrivaled spatiotemporal resolution in a number of imaging configura-
tions and have ushered in new imaging methodologies such as serial femtosecond X-
ray coherent diffractive imaging. A single, ultrafast, high-energy, XFEL pulse forms
a diffractive image of a target particle before photoionizing it, whereupon the parti-
cle vaporizes via a “Coulomb explosion.” This approach is referred to as diffraction-
before-destruction. Many such individual diffractive patterns are recorded from indi-
vidual particles that are serially injected into the XFEL beam via a jet. Patterns with
the same orientation are combined to form a full set of 3D diffraction data, from which
the image is extracted by use of phase retrieval. This technique is suitable for a broad
variety of targets, including nanocrystals, proteins, and viruses.

Valuable information about the internal workings of molecules can also be obtained
by optical/X-ray pump-probe experiments. Ultrafast optical-laser pulses are used to
pump a target to manipulate its internal electronic state and XFEL pulses are used to
probe it after an adjustable delay time. The collected data is fashioned into a movie
that tracks femtosecond-scale changes to the electronic states and molecular structure.
The reorganization of electron clouds in the course of making and breaking molecular
bonds has been visualized.

706 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

G. Tabulation of Selected Laser Characteristics

Table 16.3-1 lists, in order of increasing wavelength, several characteristics for various

lasers. The broad range of transition wavelengths, wall-plug efficiencies, and output

powers 15 noteworthy. The transition cross section, spontaneous lifetime, and transition

linewidth for a number of these lasers are provided in Table 15.3-1. The laser linewidth

Av, is generally orders of magnitude smaller than the transition linewidth Av because

of the additional frequency selectivity imposed by the optical resonator.

Table 16.3-1 Parameters for some well-known laser media, in order of increasing wavelength.
Single Mode Approx. Max. Energy-
Transition (S) or CW Wall-Plug Output Level

Wavelength Multimode or Efficiency Power or Diagram

Laser Medium? Ло (М) Pulsed? п.(%)° Energy (Fig.)

X-ray free-electron laser (LCLS) 1.1-44 A M Pulsed 10-6 2 mJ

Ne* Ka (g) 14.6A $ Pulsed 10-9 Lud

Ag'®* (р) 13.9 nm M Pulsed 107-4 = 85 pd

С5+ (р) 18.2 пт М Pulsed 10-3 2mJ  14.1-1

АтЕ Exciplex (5) 193 nm M Pulsed 0.2 1J

KrF Exciplex (g) 248 nm M Pulsed 0.4 1.57

Ат* (g) 515 nm $/М CW 0.05 15 W

Rhodamine-6G (1) 560-640 nm S/M CW 10 100mW_ 14.1-8

Ne (He-Ne) (g) 633 nm S/M CW 0.1 50 т\ 14.1-2

Kr* (2) 647 пт $/М CW 0.01 1W

Cr?*:A1,03 (ruby) (s) 694 nm M CW 4 1W 15.3-1

СВ+:ВеАЪО. (alexandrite) (s) 700-820 nm M CW 40 25W  14.1-4

Ti?*:A1,03 ($) 700-1050 nm S/M CW 0.1 5 W 16.3-3

Yb?" :YAG (thin-disk) ($) 1030 nm S/M CW 30. ТК\ 16.3-2

Nd?*:Glass (phosphate) (s) 1053 nm S/M Pulsed 1. 507 15.3-3

Nd?" :YAG ($) 1064 nm S/M CW 15. 200 \  14.1-5

Nd?*:YVOg ($) 1064 пт $/М CW 30. 30W  16.3-1

Yb" :Silica fiber ($) 1070 nm S/M CW 40. 10 kW

Cr*+:Mg2SiOg (forsterite) (s) 1100-1400 nm M CW 0.5 1W

Er®* :Silica fiber ($) 1550 nm S/M CW 20. 2kW 15.3-6

Tm?" :Silica fiber ($) 1800-2100 nm S/M CW 35. 500 W

Cr?*:ZnS (s) 1900-3000 nm S/M CW 25. 100 W

Ne (He-Ne) (=) 3.39 wm S/M CW 0.1 20mW 14.1-2

СО.5 (g) 10.6 wm S/M CW 15. 500 \ 14.1-7

H20 (g) 28 им S/M CW 0.05 250mW

СНзОН (methanol) (g) 118.8 wm S/M CW 0.03 150mW

HCN (hydrogen cyanide) (g) 336.8 um S/M CW 0.05 120mW

* Gas (g), solid ($), liquid (1), plasma (р).

о Lasers designated “CW” can be operated in pulsed mode as well. Lasers that cannot sustain a continuous

population inversion can operate only in pulsed mode and are denoted “Pulsed.”

© The wall-plug efficiency 7с (also known as the power-conversion efficiency or overall efficiency) is the ratio of

the output optical power Ро to the input electrical power Рь (for pulsed lasers, it is the ratio of the energies per

pulse). Values reported have substantial uncertainty since they sometimes include the electrical power consumed

for overhead functions such as cooling and monitoring. Laser diodes exhibit the highest efficiencies, which can

exceed 70%, as discussed in Sec. 18.4.

Ч The maximum output power for CW systems varies over a substantial range, as does the maximum output energy

per pulse for pulsed systems (in part because of the wide range of pulse durations). Representative values are listed.

Achievable values for single-mode operation with no amplification are provided where available; multimode

output powers are generally significantly higher. Output powers delivered by laser systems used for industrial

applications can be orders of magnitude higher.

16.4 PULSEDLASERS 707
16.4 PULSED LASERS
It is sometimes desirable to operate lasers in a pulsed mode since the optical power can
be greatly increased when the output pulse has limited duration. Lasers can be made to
emit optical pulses with durations as short as femtoseconds; the durations can often be
further compressed by making use of nonlinear optical techniques (Sec. 23.2). Pulse
repetition rates (PRRs) can extend to the THz range and individual laser pulses can
carry enormous peak powers and intensities. A 10-fs-duration pulse of 10-mJ energy,
for example, exhibits a peak power of 1 TW. Focusing such a pulse to a 3-jzm-radius
spot provides a peak intensity of 7 EW/cm?. Some lasers must be operated in a pulsed
mode since CW operation cannot be sustained, as is evident in Table 16.3-1.
A. Methods of Pulsing Lasers
The most direct method of obtaining pulsed light from a laser is to use a continuous-
wave (CW) laser in conjunction with an external modulator (switch) that transmits the
light only during selected short time intervals. This simple method has two distinct
disadvantages, however. First, the scheme is inefficient since it blocks (and therefore
wastes) the light energy during the off-time of the pulse train. Second, the peak power
of the pulses cannot exceed the steady power of the CW source, as illustrated in
Fig. 16.4-1(a).
Modulator Modulator
1 Peak power р
Peak power
--p4---- yo ------47- CW power || __ | | Average
power
t t
(а) (b)
Figure 16.4-1 Comparison of attainable peak laser output powers using (a) an external modulator
and (6) an internal modulator.

More efficient pulsing schemes are based on turning the laser itself on and off by
means of an internal modulator, designed so that energy is stored during the off-time
and released during the on-time. Energy may be stored in the resonator in the form of
light that is periodically permitted to escape, or in the atomic system in the form of a
population inversion that is periodically released by allowing the system to oscillate.
These schemes permit short laser pulses to be generated with peak powers far in excess
of the constant power deliverable by a CW laser, as illustrated in Fig. 16.4-1(0).

Four common methods are used for the internal modulation of laser light: 1) gain
switching, 2) Q-switching, 3) cavity dumping, and 4) mode locking. These are consid-
ered in turn.

Gain Switching

Gain switching is a rather direct approach in which the gain is controlled by turning
the laser pump on and off (Fig. 16.4-2). In a flashlamp-pumped pulsed ruby laser, for
example, the pump (flashlamp) is switched on periodically for brief periods of time
by a sequence of electrical pulses. During the on-times, the gain coefficient exceeds
the loss coefficient and laser light is produced. Pulsed laser diodes are generally gain

708 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
switched because it is easy to modulate the electric current that provides the pumping
(Sec. 18.3). The laser-pulse rise and fall times achievable with gain switching are
derived in Sec. 16.4B.
Pump Pump
t
(SI = пп
Loss —— —— —— —— —-
t
Laser | | |
output
t
Figure 16.4-2 Gain switching. The laser pump is switched on and off periodically.
Q-Switching
In Q-switching, the laser output is turned off by periodically increasing the resonator
loss (spoiling the resonator quality factor Q) with the help of a modulated absorber
inside the resonator (Fig. 16.4-3). Thus, Q-switching is loss switching. Because the
pump continues to deliver constant power at all times, energy is stored in the atoms
in the form of an accumulated population difference during the high-loss off-times.
When the losses are reduced during the on-times, the large accumulated population
difference is released, generating intense (usually short) pulses of light. An analysis of
this method is provided in Sec. 16.4C.
Loss уе га pO
Gain rr и
ul L4 Lu [1
ОХ] | |
Газег
Medusted oupat [] {| _ [|__|
fi
Figure 16.4-3 (-switching. During the off-times, energy builds up as an accumulated population
inversion in the active medium. The resonator loss is modulated by use of an absorber.
Cavity Dumping
Cavity dumping is a technique based on storing photons (rather than a population
difference) in the resonator during the off-times, and releasing them during the on-
times. It differs from @-switching in that the resonator loss is modulated by altering
the mirror transmittance (Fig. 16.4-4). The system operates like a bucket into which
water is poured from a hose at a constant rate. The bucket represents the resonator, the
water hose represents the constant pump, and the bucket bottom represents the laser
output mirror. After a period of time of accumulating water, the bottom of the bucket
is suddenly removed so that the water is “dumped.” The bucket bottom is subsequently
returned and the process is repeated. A constant flow of water is therefore converted
into a pulsed flow. The leakage of light from the resonator, including useful light, is not
permitted during the off-times; photons are stored in the resonator and cannot escape.
This results in negligible resonator loss, thereby increasing the optical power inside the
laser resonator. The mirror is suddenly removed altogether (e.g., by rotating it out of
alignment), increasing its transmittance to 100% during the on-times. The result is a
strong pulse of laser light. As the accumulated photons leave the resonator, the sudden

16.4 PULSEDLASERS 709
increase in the loss arrests the oscillation. A detailed analysis for cavity dumping is
not provided in the sequel inasmuch as it is closely related to that of Q-switching. This
is because the variation of the gain and loss with time are similar, as may be seen by
comparing Fig. 16.4-4 with Fig. 16.4-3.

Mirror
ше || || |||
А
ГЕ Г!
Gain —j1+—_—_++—_+-
Loss ——! О ОО АОИ ЗА
1
Газег | | | | | | |
output
t
Figure 16.4-4 Cavity dumping. During the off-times, energy builds up as an increase of the
photon-number density in the resonator. One of the mirrors is periodically removed (e.g., by rotating
it out of alignment) to dump the stored photons as useful light.
Mode Locking
The pulse-generation approaches discussed above are based on the transient dynamics
of a laser medium. Mode locking differs from these approaches in that it is a dynamic
steady-state process. It is the most important of all the techniques for generating trains
of ultrashort laser pulses. Pulsed laser action is attained by locking the phases of the
modes of a laser to each other. An example is provided by the longitudinal modes
of a multimode laser, which oscillate at frequencies that are equally spaced by the
intermodal frequency иг = c/2d. When the phases of these components are locked
together, they behave like the Fourier components of a periodic function of time, and
therefore form a periodic pulse train. The mode coupling is achieved by periodically
modulating the losses inside the resonator. Mode locking is examined in Sec. 16.4D.
*B. Analysis of Transient Effects
An analytical description of the operation of pulsed lasers requires an understanding
of the dynamics of the laser oscillation process, 1.е., the time course of laser oscillation
onset and termination. The steady-state solutions presented earlier in this chapter are
inadequate for this purpose. The lasing process is governed by two variables: the
number of photons per unit volume in the resonator, n(t), and the atomic population
difference per unit volume, N(t) = N2(t) — М: (8); both are functions of the time t.
Rate Equation for the Photon-Number Density
The photon-number density n is governed by the rate equation
dn п
— =-— + МИА. (16.4-1)
dt Tp
The first term on the right-hand side represents photon loss caused by leakage from the
resonator, at a rate given by the inverse photon lifetime 1/7,. The second term repre-
sents net photon gain, at a rate NW, arising from stimulated emission and absorption.
Here, the quantity W; = ¢o(v) = спо(и) is the probability density for induced
absorption/emission. Spontaneous emission is assumed to be negligible. With the help

710 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
of the relation М, = a,/o(v) = 1/ct,o(v), where М, is the threshold population
difference [see (16.1-15)], we write o(v) = 1/сть Mt, from which
п
W; = ——. 16.4-2
Ni Tp ( )
Substituting this into (16.4-1) provides a simple differential equation for the photon
number density n,
d N
min, an (16.4-3)
dt Tp Nt T Photon-Number
Rate Equation
As long as М > М,, dn/dt will be positive and n will increase. When steady state
(dn/dt = 0) is reached, М = Ny.
Rate Equation for the Population Difference
The dynamics of the population difference N(t) depends on the pumping configuration.
We proceed to analyze a three-level pumping scheme (Sec. 15.2B). The rate equation
for the population of the upper energy level of the transition is, according to (15.2-8),
dN М
—* = R— — — W,(N2 — М), (16.4-4)
dt tsp
where it is assumed that т> = ts). The pumping rate К is taken to be independent of
the population difference М. Denoting the total atomic number density Nz + Ny by
Ма» so that М: = $(Na — М) and № = 4(N, + М), we obtain a differential equation
for the population difference N = № — № 1:
dN М М
ЕО ИМ, (16.4-5)
dt tsp №
where the small-signal population difference No = 2Rts) — М. [see (15.2-27)]. Sub-
stituting the relation W; = п/Мт, from (16.4-2) into (16.4-5) then yields
dN М N N
ea 0 (16.4-6)
dt tsp Ёр Nt Tp Population-Difference Rate Equation
(Three-Level System)
The third term on the right-hand side of (16.4-6) is twice the second term on the right-
hand side of (16.4-3), and of opposite sign. This reflects the fact that the generation
of one photon by an induced transition reduces the population of level @) by one
atom while increasing the population of level ) by one atom, thereby decreasing the
population difference by two atoms.

Equations (16.4-3) and (16.4-6) are a pair of coupled nonlinear differential equa-
tions whose solution determines the transient behaviors of the photon number density
n(t) and the population difference N(t). Setting dn/dt = 0 and dN/dt = 0 leads to
М = №, and n = (No — Mi) (т»/2%ь), respectively. These are indeed the steady-state
values of N and п, obtained previously, as is evident from (16.2-12) with т. = 2tsp, as
provided by (15.2-28) for a three-level pumping scheme.

16.4 PULSEDLASERS 711
ee
EXERCISE 16.4-1
Population-Difference Rate Equation for a Four-Level System. Obtain the population-
difference rate equation for a four-level system for which 7, < tsp. Provide a rationale for the
absence of the factor of 2 that appears on the right-hand side of (16.4-6).
ee
Gain Switching
Gain switching is implemented by turning the pumping rate R on and off, which is
equivalent to modulating the small-signal population difference No = 2Rts, — Na,
as provided in (15.2-27). A schematic illustration of the typical time evolution of the
population difference N(t) and the photon-number density n(t), as the laser is pulsed
by varying No, is provided in Fig. 16.4-5.

Noy ------ No(t) Pump
N(t) Population difference
Ne Мо)
Noa |
0 i, 5 t
i} n(t) Photon-number density р
(Nos-Ne) 52 of
t
Figure 16.4-5 Variation of the population difference N(t) and the photon-number density n(t)
with time as a square pump pulse causes No to suddenly increase from а low value No, to a high
value Nop at t = 0, and then to return back to the low value No, at = $5.
The following regimes are evident in the process:
= Fort < 0, the population difference N(t) = Noa lies below the threshold N; and
oscillation does not occur.
= The pump is turned on at $ = 0, which increases No from a value No, below
threshold to a value Nop above threshold in step-function fashion. The population
difference N(t) begins to increase as a result. As long as N(t) < №, however,
the photon-number density п = 0. In this region (16.4-6) therefore becomes
dN/dt = (No — N)/tsp, indicating that N(t) grows exponentially toward its
equilibrium value No}, with time constant tgp.
= Once N(t) crosses the threshold N; at t = ty, laser oscillation begins and n(t)
increases. The population inversion then begins to deplete so that the rate of
increase of N(t) slows. As n(t) becomes larger, the depletion becomes more
effective so that M(t) begins to decay toward N,. N(t) finally reaches N,, at which
time n(t) reaches its steady-state value.
= The pump is turned off at time $ = tz, so that No(t) returns to its initial value
Noa. N(t) and n(t) proceed to decay to the values №. and 0, respectively.
The detailed profile of the buildup and decay of n(t) is obtained by numerically
solving (16.4-3) and (16.4-6). The precise shape of the solution depends on the values
Of tsp, Tp, and №, as well as on No, and Noy (see Prob. 16.4-4).

712 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
*C. Q-Switching
(Q-switched laser pulsing is achieved by switching the resonator loss coefficient a,
from a large value during the off-time to a small value during the on-time. This may
be accomplished in any number of ways, such as by placing a modulator into the res-
onator that periodically introduces large losses. Since the lasing threshold population
difference №, is proportional to the resonator loss coefficient a, [see (16.1-14) and
(16.1-6)], the result of switching a, is to decrease №, from a high value Ni; to а low
value Nip, as illustrated in Fig. 16.4-6. Therefore, in Q-switching М, is modulated
while No remains fixed, whereas in gain switching No is modulated while N; remains
fixed (see Fig. 16.4-5).
Nea 1 ооо | Гм Loss
I I
№ Pump
0 ho. ot ot 1
| density
1
Figure 16.4-6 Operation of a Q-switched laser. Behavior of the threshold population difference
№, (which is proportional to the resonator loss coefficient a,.), the pump parameter No, the population
difference N(t), and the photon number density n(¢).
The population and photon-number densities behave as follows:
= At = 0, the pump is turned оп so that No follows a step function. The loss
is maintained at a level that is sufficiently high (Ni; = Nia > No) so that laser
oscillation cannot begin. The population difference N(t) therefore builds up (with
time constant ts, ). The medium behaves as a high-gain amplifier in this region but
the loss is sufficiently large that oscillation is prevented.
= Att = В, the loss is suddenly decreased so that N;, diminishes to a value Nip <
No. In accordance with (16.1-13), oscillation therefore begins and the photon-
number density rises sharply. The presence of the radiation causes a depletion
of the population inversion (gain saturation) whereupon N(t) begins to decrease.
When N(t) falls below Мь, the loss again exceeds the gain, resulting in a rapid
decrease of the photon-number density (with a time constant of the order of the
photon lifetime т»).

= At ¢ = fo, the loss is reinstated, ensuring the availability of a long period of
population-inversion buildup to prepare for the next pulse. The process is repeated
periodically so that a periodic optical pulse train is generated.

We now undertake an analysis to determine the peak power, energy, duration,
and shape of the optical pulse generated by a Q-switched laser in the steady pulsed
state. We rely on the basic three-level-system rate equations (16.4-3) and (16.4-6) for
n(t) and N(t), respectively, which we solve during the on-time & to ty indicated in
Fig. 16.4-6. The problem can, of course, be solved numerically. However, the equations
simplify sufficiently to permit an analytical solution if we assume that the first two
terms on the right-hand side of (16.4-6) are negligible. This assumption is suitable
if both the pumping and the spontaneous emission are negligible in comparison with
the effects of induced transitions during the short time interval from ¢; to ty. This

16.4 PULSEDLASERS 713
approximation turns out to be reasonable if the duration of the generated optical
pulse is much shorter than $». When this is the case, (16.4-3) and (16.4-6) become,
respectively,

dn N п
— = | — - 1] — 16.4-7
dN Nn
— = -2— —. 16.4-8
These are two coupled differential equations in n(t) and N(t), with initial conditions
n = Oand N = №; at t = &. During the time interval from t; to tr, М, is fixed at its
low value Nip.
Dividing (16.4-7) by (16.4-8), we obtain a single differential equation relating n
and N,
—z-|—-1 16.4-9
dN 2 ( N ) , ( )
which we integrate to obtain
пя УМ In(N) — УМ + constant. (16.4-10)
Using the initial condition п. = 0 when № = М; finally leads to
1 N 4
ns 5 М Ing —5(N—N,). (16.4-11)
i
Pulse Power
According to (16.2-10) and (16.2-3), the internal photon-flux density (comprising both
directions) is given by ф = пс, while the external photon-flux density emerging
from the output mirror of transmittance J is Фо = 3Ine. Assuming that the photon-
flux density is uniform over the cross-sectional area A of the emerging beam, the
corresponding optical output power is
P, = hv Ado = ShveTAn = hv Ts Vn, (16.4-12)
where У = Ad is the volume of the resonator. According to (16.2-17), ШТ << 1
the fraction of the resonator loss that contributes to useful light at the output is 7. =
Т(с/2а)ть, where пе is the extraction efficiency, which leads to
у
P, =nehv . (16.4-13)
Tp
Equation (16.4-13) is easily interpreted since the factor nV/7, is the number of pho-
tons lost from the resonator per unit time.

714 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
Peak Pulse Power
As discussed earlier, and illustrated in Fig. 16.4-6, n reaches its peak value n, when
М = №, = Мь. This is corroborated by setting dn/dt = 0 in (16.4-7), which leads
immediately to N = №. Substituting this into (16.4-11) therefore provides
М М N
—1y. at jy —t — —t -
Np = in, (1 + м, In м, м) . (16.4-14)
Using this result in conjunction with (16.4-12) provides the peak power
P, =hvT—Vn,. (16.4-15)
2d
When N; >> Ni, as must be the case for pulses with large peak powers, we have
М. / М; < 1 so that (16.4-14) provides
Mp © №. (16.4-16)
In this limit, the peak photon-number density is equal to one-half of the initial popula-
tion density difference whereupon the peak power assumes a particularly simple form:
С
Py = $hv 759 УМ; . (16.4-17)
Peak Pulse Power
Pulse Energy
The pulse energy E is given by
ty
Е = ] P, dt, (16.4-18)
ti
which, in accordance with (16.4-12), can be written as
Ел [' nyaewrev | ам 16.4-19
vTyqV | niyar=wwas5v | мц (164-19)
Inserting (16.4-8) in (16.4-19), we obtain
N;
с ‘dN
Е = Зри УМ — 16.4-20
та Ум» |‘, ( )
which integrates to
Е = Зри 75а УМ, Tp ny, . (16.4-21)
The final population difference №; is determined by setting n = 0 and М = Nf in
(16.4-11), which provides
М Ni—WNy
In— = ——., 16.4-22
Dy Wy, ( )

16.4 PULSEDLASERS 715
Finally, substitution of (16.4-22) into (16.4-21) yields
с
Е = ghv Ts, Vt (Ni — Np). (16.4-23)
Q-Switched
Pulse Energy
When № > Ny, we obtain Е = $hv (с/2а)Уть Ni, as expected. It remains
to solve (16.4-22) for Ny. One approach is to let X = N;/N, and У = М;/М,,
whereupon (16.4-22) becomes In(X/Y) = X — Y or, equivalently, nY — Y =
In X — X. Exponentiating both sides of this equation gives ехр(шУ — У) =
ехр(ш X — X), which in turn provides Y exp(—Y) = X exp(—xX). Thus, given
X = М,/ М, we can solve for У = М;/М, numerically or by using the graph
provided in Fig. 16.4-7.
хех Figure 16.4-7 Graphical construc-
tion for determining №; from N;, where
Х = М; / № and У = М; / №. For X =
X, the ordinate represents the value
Х ехр(-Х!1). Since the correspond-
ing solution Y; obeys У! exp(—Y1) =
Х! ехр(-Х1), it must have the same
У У, ра Хх, X value of the ordinate.
Pulse Duration
A rough estimate of the pulse duration is provided by the ratio of the pulse energy to
the peak pulse power. Using (16.4-14), (16.4-15), and (16.4-23), we obtain
N;/N, —Nz/N
Tpulse = 7; АМ ММ : fl : . (16.4-24)
P PN; /N, — In(N;/N,) — 1
ТВ т Pulse Duration
When Л; >> ЛМ and М; > Ny, the pulse duration reduces to Tpulse © Tp-
Pulse Shape
The optical pulse shape, along with the various pulse characteristics described above,
can be determined by numerically integrating (16.4-7) and (16.4-8). Examples of the
resulting pulse shapes are displayed in Fig. 16.4-8.
nit)
м. N
3 nN. Figure 16.4-8 (-switched pulse shapes ob-
tained by numerically integrating the approx-
imate rate equations provided in (16.4-7) and
2 (16.4-8). The photon-number density n(t) is
\ normalized to the threshold population differ-
\ ence № = Nip and the time ¢ is normalized
\ to the photon lifetime 7, . As the ratio №; /М,
\ increases, the pulse narrows and attains a higher
QQ peak value. In the limit N;/N, >> 1, the peak
2 value of n(t) approaches 3 Ni.
Ze | SS]
0 2 4 6 tL

716 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 16.4-1. Q-Switched Frequency-Doubled Nd**:YAG Microchip Laser. A
slice of МаЗТ:УАС is brought together with a saturable absorber and an intracavity frequency-
doubling crystal (see Sec. 22.2A) to form a 1-mm-long cavity. When pumped with 1 W of light
from a fiber-coupled 808-nm laser diode, this microchip laser generates (Q-switched optical pulses at
532 nm. Each pulse has an energy of 30 |1] and a duration of 250 ps. The repetition rate 15 = 10 kHz
and the average power is 300 mW.
ПИ
НИ
EXERCISE 16.4-2
Pulsed Ruby Laser. Consider the ruby-laser example discussed in Exercise 16.1-1. Assume that
the laser is now Q-switched and that at t = t; [see Fig. 16.4-6] the population difference №; = 6N,.
Use Fig. 16.4-8 to estimate the shape and duration of the laser pulse. Calculate the approximate peak
power, energy, and duration of the laser pulse.
ee
D. Mode Locking
A laser can oscillate on many longitudinal modes, with frequencies that are equally
separated by the Fabry-Perot intermodal spacing ик = c/2d. Though these modes
normally oscillate independently (they are then called free-running modes), techniques
are available for coupling them and locking their phases together. The modes can then
be regarded as the components of a Fourier-series expansion of a periodic function
of time with period Тр = 1/ир = 2d/c, which constitute a periodic pulse train.
This was the approach taken in Sec. 2.6B, where we considered the interference of
M monochromatic waves with equal intensities and equally spaced frequencies. We
discuss in turn the properties of a mode-locked pulse train and methods of achieving
mode locking, and then provide several examples of mode-locked lasers.
Properties of a Mode-Locked Pulse Train
If each of the laser modes is approximated by a uniform plane wave propagating in the
z direction with velocity c = c,/n, where n is the refractive index of the laser medium,
the total complex wavefunction of the field may be written in the form of a sum:
. z
U(z,t) = У`А. ехр [ти (i — =) ; (16.4-25)
q
where
ид = + дик, q=0,+1,+2,... (16.4-26)
is the frequency of mode 4 and A, is its complex envelope. For convenience we
assume that the 4 = 0 mode coincides with the central frequency 1 of the atomic
lineshape. The magnitudes |A,| may be determined from knowledge of the spectral
profile of the gain and the resonator loss (see Sec. 16.2B). In an inhomogeneously
broadened medium, the modes interact with different groups of atoms so that their
phases arg{A,} are random and statistically independent.
Substituting (16.4-26) into (16.4-25) provides
z . z
U(z,t)=A (i _ =) ехр [ти (i _ =) (16.4-27)
с с

16.4 PULSEDLASERS 717
where the complex envelope A(t) is the function
A(t) => Age ла (16.4-28)
= x a
q ™ Tr
and
1 2d
Tr=—=—. (16.4-29)
VP [©
The complex envelope A(t) in (16.4-28) is a periodic function of t of period Те while
A(t — z/c) is a periodic function of z of period сТр = 2d. If the magnitudes and
phases of the complex coefficients A, are properly chosen, A(t) may be made to take
the form of a sequence of periodic narrow pulses.

Consider, for example, М modes (а = 0, +1,..., +5, so that М = 25 + 1) whose
complex coefficients are all equal: A, = A for = 0,+1,..., 5. Equation (16.4-28)
then becomes

5 jq2nt 5 gst — 2S 9 — в
_ — а — = a
A(t) = 4 ею ( т. ) AS > at=A — A—
q=-S q=-S
(16.4-30)
where х = exp(j2mt/ Tr) (see Sec. 2.6B for more details). After а few algebraic
manipulations, A(t) can be cast in the form
sin(Mat/Tr)
A(t) = А. 16.4-31
6) sin(at/ Те) ( )
The optical intensity Г = |U|? is then given by I(t, =) = |A(t — z/c)|? so that
a)
Mr(t - Ty
I(t,z) = [aye SB Matt = 2/0) / Tel | (16.4-32)
sin* [a(t — z/c)/Tr|
which is a periodic function of time, as illustrated in Fig. 16.4-9.
MI — Tr >
Intensity Tr
> м
_ Т,
м В ПО ООН Е ИВ
t
Figure 16.4-9 Intensity of the periodic pulse train resulting from the sum of М laser modes of
equal magnitudes and phases. Each pulse has a duration Tpulse that is М times smaller than the period
Те and a peak intensity that is MW times greater than the mean intensity.

The behavior of the mode-locked laser pulse train is therefore dependent on the
number of modes М, which is proportional to the transition linewidth Av. If M =
Av /vp, then the pulse duration Тризе = Tr/M = 1/Av. Since Tpuise is inversely

718 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

proportional to the transition linewidth Av, and since Av can be quite large, very
narrow mode-locked laser pulses can generated. The ratio between the peak and mean
intensities is equal to the number of modes М, which can also be quite large (Fig. 16.4-
9).

The period of the pulse train is Тр = 2d/c and its pulse repetition rate is ик =
1/Те = c/2d. The period Tp is just the time for a single round trip of reflection
within the resonator. Indeed, the light in a mode-locked laser can be regarded as a
single narrow pulse of photons that reflects back and forth between the mirrors of the
resonator, as portrayed in Fig. 16.4-10. At each encounter with the output mirror, a
fraction of the photons exits in the form of a pulse of light. The transmitted pulses are
separated by the distance c(2d/c) = 2d and each has a spatial width dpulse = CTpulse =
24/М.

Optical

switch

Anuise 5
У, —________
=— а

Figure 16.4-10 The mode-locked laser pulse reflects back and forth between the mirrors of the
resonator. Each time it reaches the output mirror it transmits a short optical pulse. The transmitted
pulses are separated by the distance 2d and travel with velocity c. The switch opens only when the
pulse reaches the mirror and only for the duration of the pulse. The periodic pulse train is therefore
unaffected by the presence of the switch. Other wave patterns, however, suffer losses that preclude
oscillation.

The properties of a mode-locked laser pulse train are summarized in Table 16.4-1.
Though the formulas presented in the table are applicable for the special case in which
the modes have equal amplitudes and phases, calculations based on more realistic
behavior provide similar results.

Table 16.4-1 Characteristic properties of a mode-locked pulse train.

Temporal period Tr = 2d/c Spatial period 2d
Frequency spacing Vp = c/2d Pulse repetition rate Vp =c/2d
Pulse duration Tpulse = Tr/M = 1/Av Pulse length dpulse = 2d/M
Mean intensity I Peak intensity I,=MI
НИ
EXERCISE 16.4-3
Demonstration of Pulsing by Mode Locking. Plot the intensity I(t) = |A(t)|? of a wave
whose envelope A(t) is given by the sum in (16.4-28). Assume that the number of modes M = 11
and use the following choices for the complex coefficients Aj:
(a) Equal magnitudes and the same phase (this should reproduce the results provided earlier).
(b) Magnitudes that obey the Gaussian spectral profile |A,| = exp[—4(q/5)*] and the same phase.
(c) Equal magnitudes and random phases (obtain the phases by using a random number generator to

produce a random variable uniformly distributed between 0 and 2т).
НИ

16.4 PULSEDLASERS 719
Methods of Mode Locking
We have found thus far that if a large number М of modes are locked in phase, they
form a giant narrow pulse of photons that reflects back and forth between the mirrors
of the resonator. The spatial length of the pulse is a factor of М smaller than twice
the resonator length. We now turn to a consideration of methods suitable for locking
the phases of the modes together, a task that can be accomplished with the help of an
active or passive modulator (switch) placed within the resonator. We consider active
mode locking and passive mode locking in turn.

Suppose that an active optical modulator controlled by an external applied signal
(e.g., an acousto-optic or electro-optic switch, as discussed in Secs. 20.2A and 21.1B,
respectively) is placed inside the resonator, and that this switch blocks the light at all
times except when the optical pulse is about to cross it, whereupon it opens for the
duration of the pulse (Fig. 16.4-10). Since the pulse itself is permitted to pass, it is
not affected by the presence of the switch and it continues its travels uninterrupted.
In the absence of mode locking, the individual modes have different phases that are
determined by the random conditions at the onset of their oscillation. If those phases
happen, by accident, to take on equal values, the sum of the modes will form a giant
pulse and it will not be affected by the presence of the switch. However, any other
combination of phases will superpose to form a field distribution that is totally or
partially blocked by the switch, which adds to the losses of the system. In the presence
of the switch, therefore, lasing can occur only when the modal phases are equal. At
turn-on, the laser waits for the “lucky accident” of phase alignment; once oscillation
begins the locking continues.

The same argument can be framed in mathematical terms. An optical field must
satisfy the wave equation with the boundary conditions imposed by the presence of the
switch. The multimode optical field of (16.4-25) does indeed satisfy the wave equation
for any combination of phases, including equal phases. Only this latter case, however,
also satisfies the boundary conditions imposed by the switch so it is the unique solution.

A passive switch such as a saturable absorber may also be used to achieve mode
locking. A saturable absorber (see Sec. 15.4A) is a medium whose absorption co-
efficient decreases as the intensity of the light passing through it increases; it thus
transmits intense pulses with relatively little absorption while weak pulses are ab-
sorbed. Oscillation can therefore occur only when the phases of the different modes
are related to each other in such a way that they form an intense pulse that is able
pass through the absorbing medium. Semiconductor saturable-absorber mirrors
(SESAMs), which are saturable absorbers that operate in reflection, are in widespread
use; the more intense the light, the greater the reflection provided by these devices.
SESAMs can accommodate wavelengths in the range from 800 to 1600 nm, pulse
durations from fs to ns, and power levels from mW to hundreds of W. Graphene
saturable absorbers are effective for achieving broadband laser mode locking since
graphene has an absorbance that is nearly constant from A, = 0.7 to 25 wm, and
also exhibits strong absorption saturation and fast (ps) recovery time (Sec. 17.1В).
Saturable absorbers can also produce Q-switched mode locking, where the laser emits
collections of mode-locked pulses within a Q-switching envelope.

Passive mode locking can also be implemented via Kerr-lens mode locking, which
relies on the optical Kerr effect, a nonlinear optical phenomenon that causes the refrac-
tive index of a material to change with optical intensity (Sec. 22.3). A Kerr medium,
which may be the gain medium itself or a material placed within the laser resonator,
acts as a lens with a focal length that is inversely proportional to the intensity (Ex-
ercise 22.3-2). The Kerr lens is designed to reduce the area of the laser mode at a
specified location within the resonator when the light intensity is high. An aperture
placed at that location will then permit the light to pass through, but only when the
phases are aligned so that the pulse intensity is high. Alternatively, the reduced modal

720 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
area in the gain medium can be used to increase its overlap with the strongly focused
pump beam, thereby increasing the effective gain. The Kerr-lens approach is inherently
broadband because of the parametric nature of the process. The rapid response and
recovery inherent in passive mode locking generally leads to shorter optical pulses
than can be obtained with active mode locking. Passive and active devices are used for
the mode locking of inhomogeneously and homogeneously broadened media alike.
Examples of Mode-Locked Lasers
Table 16.4-2 provides a list of pulse durations available using selected mode-locked
laser media. They are listed in order of increasing values of the observed pulse duration,
which spans a broad range. The observed values depend not only on the medium, but
also on the method used to achieve mode locking. Limitations are also imposed by
nonlinearities and dispersion in the medium.
Table 16.4-2 Typical pulse durations for a number of mode-locked lasers subject to homogeneous
(H) and inhomogeneous (Г) broadening.

Calculated
Laser Transition Pulse Duration Observed
Medium Linewidth* Av Tpulse = 1/Av Pulse Duration
ТВ": АБО (Ti:Sapphire) Н 100 THz 10 fs 10 fs
Ст :MgSiOu (Forsterite) H 50 THz 20 fs 20 fs
Rhodamine-6G dye НЛ 40 THz 25 fs 27 fs
Nd?+:Glass (phosphate) I 7 THz 140 fs 150 fs
Er?* :Silica fiber H/I 5 THz 200 fs 200 fs
Yb**+ :Silica fiber Нл 5 THz 200 fs 5 ps
Nd?+:YAG H 150 GHz 7 ps 7 ps
Art I 3.5 GHz 286 ps 150 ps
He—Ne I 1.5 GHz 667 ps 600 ps
COz I 60 MHz 16 ns 20 ns
“Тре transition linewidths Av are drawn from Table 15.3-1.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 16.4-2. Mode Locking т а Neodymium-Doped Glass Laser. Consider а
Nd?*:glass laser operating at A, = 1.05 jum. It has a refractive index и = 1.5 and a transition
linewidth Av = 7 THz (Tables 15.3-1 and 16.4-2). The pulse duration is thus Tpuise = 1/Av =
140 fs. If the resonator has a length 4 = 15 cm, the temporal period is Ty = 2nd/co = 1.5
ns and the mode separation (and pulse repetition rate) is yr = c,/2nd = 0.67 GHz. This yields
М = Av/vp = 10500 modes and a pulse length of dpuise = 2d/M = 28.6 jum. The peak intensity
I, is 10500 times greater than the mean intensity Г. In media with broad transition linewidths, mode
locking is generally more advantageous than @-switching for obtaining short pulses. However, gas
lasers generally have narrow atomic linewidths that make it difficult to obtain ultrashort pulses via
mode locking.
EXAMPLE 16.4-3. Mode Locking т an Ytterbium-Doped Fiber Laser. A passively
mode-locked Yb?* :silica-fiber laser operated at Л. = 1070 nm produces an average power of 10 W
in the form of 200-nJ pulses with a peak power of 40 kW, with the help of a SESAM. The pulse
repetition rate is 50 MHz and the observed pulse duration is 5 ps; this is substantially longer than
the expected value since Av = 5 THz (Table 16.4-2), which provides тразе = 1/Av = 200 fs.
The discrepancy arises because of group velocity dispersion, which imparts broadening and also
chirps the pulse as it travels through the laser medium (Fig. 5.7-3). The normal dispersion in silica
fiber near A, = 1 им (Fig. 5.7-5) can be compensated by introducing anomalous dispersion via
a fiber Bragg grating or a photonic-crystal fiber, which reduces the observed pulse duration to 200
fs. Additional reductions to the pulse duration can be effected by using suitable pulse-compression
techniques (Sec. 23.2). Pulses with far greater energies and peak powers can be obtained.
ПОНИ

16.4 PULSEDLASERS 721

Mode-locked lasers find use in many applications, including time-resolved mea-
surements, imaging, metrology, communications, materials processing, and clinical
medicine. The mode-locked laser of choice is often the Ti:sapphire laser, whose center
wavelength can be tuned over the range 700-1050 nm and whose individual pulses
have durations as short as 10 fs. A commonly available commercial version of this
laser makes use of Kerr-lens mode locking and delivers 50-nJ pulses of 10-fs duration
and 1-MW peak power, at a repetition rate of 80 MHz, but repetition rates in excess
of 10 GHz are available. The spectral bandwidth Av of this laser can also be easily
constrained to provide ps-duration mode-locked pulses. The intensity available from
a mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser, or an amplified version thereof, is also sufficient
to support harmonic generation and other nonlinear wavelength-shifting techniques
(Chapters 22 and 23), which can provide sources of mode-locked pulses at shorter
wavelengths. In particular, second-harmonic generation produces pulses in the range
350-525 nm and third-harmonic generation reaches 230-350 nm.

In the direction of longer wavelengths, mode-locked operation can be extended
beyond A, = 1 им by using a Ti:sapphire mode-locked laser oscillator as the source
for a synchronously pumped optical parametric oscillator employing a crystal such as
LBO or a periodically poled crystal (Sec. 22.4C). This approach provides mode-locked
signal and idler output beams that cover the 1.0-3.3 ит infrared wavelength range.
Mode-locked ytterbium-doped and erbium-doped fiber lasers operate in the vicinity
of 1.07 and 1.55 jum, respectively. Though these lasers typically have large transition
linewidths, achievable ultrafast pulse durations, along with other performance features,
are often limited by the fiber dispersion and/or nonlinearities resulting from long fiber
lengths and small modal volumes, respectively. Low pulse repetition rates arising from
long resonator lengths may be increased by making use of harmonic mode locking,
wherein multiple, well-spaced pulses circulate within the fiber resonator. High output
powers from ultrafast fiber lasers are usually achieved by making use of chirped-pulse
amplification.

In the domain of semiconductor lasers, vertical external-cavity surface-emitting
lasers (VECSELS), also called semiconductor disk lasers (SDLs), can be operated in
mode-locked configurations with pulse durations < 100 fs and pulse repetition rates in
the range of 1-50 GHz (Sec. 18.5A). Monolithic mode-locked laser diodes, by virtue of
their very small resonator lengths, can exhibit pulse repetition rates that reach hundreds
of GHz or even 1 THz (Example 18.3-4). In the mid infrared, quantum cascade lasers
(QCLs) operating in the wavelength region 3 < A, < 12 пм can generate mode-
locked optical pulses with durations of a few ps (Sec. 18.4D).

*E. Optical Frequency Combs

Since light from a mode-locked laser has a discrete optical spectrum with uniformly
spaced frequencies over a broad band, the spectrum is known as an optical frequency
comb (OFC). The gth frequency component of an OFC is vg = дир +14, where Vp is
the frequency spacing between the adjacent ‘teeth’ of the comb and и; < vp is an offset
frequency. The number of frequency components М contained in the comb is typically
large so that the spectral bandwidth is much greater than the frequency spacing vp. An
OFC is thus completely described by two frequencies, vp and 1, both of which are
readily measured. Whereas the vy are optical frequencies, the frequency spacing for
mode-locked lasers ик = c/2d typically lies between tens of MHz and hundreds of
GHz, as determined by the length of the Fabry—Perot resonator.

By enabling the high-precision measurement of optical and ultraviolet frequencies,
OFCs have found myriad uses in physics and astronomy. They have become valuable
tools for precision molecular, atomic, and nuclear spectroscopy, as well as for precision
optical imaging and metrology. Moreover, OFCs comprising entangled photon pairs

722 CHAPTER 16 LASERS
generated via on-chip quantum circuits (Sec. 13.3D) offer parameter estimation with
even greater precision.

Measurement of an octave-spanning OFC. If the highest frequency of an OFC
is a factor of two greater than the lowest frequency, the OFC is said to span a frequency
octave. Since the frequency spacing is established by the fixed laser cavity, the comb is
highly uniform and ир is highly stable. The OFC may therefore serve as a frequency
ruler against which unknown frequencies may be measured. Such measurements usu-
ally rely on light beating (Sec. 2.6B), which generates frequency differences that are
readily determined with electronic instruments.

The frequencies v, of an OFC may be determined if the frequencies vp and 1,
which are far smaller than v,, are measured. The measurement of vp is straightfor-
ward since it is the pulse repetition rate of the mode-locked pulse train, which can be
quantified with a fast detector. Alternatively, the value of ир can be established with the
help of an electronic spectrum analyzer, which will display the beat frequency between
adjacent frequencies in the comb.

Establishing the value of и; is more difficult, though straightforward. If the comb
spans a frequency octave, и; may be elicited by beating the comb with a frequency-
doubled version of itself. Frequency doubling may be implemented by making use of
second-harmonic generation in a nonlinear optical medium, as described in Sec. 22.2A.
As illustrated in Fig. 16.4-11, after frequency doubling the component of order 4
from the low-frequency side of the frequency-doubled comb has approximately the
same frequency аз the component 24 on the high-frequency side of the original comb,
Le., 20) А и2а. Measuring the beat frequency between these combs yields the offset
frequency since 2vg — Vag = 2(4ир +) — (2qvr + и;) = и;. The outcome of such
a measurement may be used to control the source of the OFC, or even to eliminate
the offset frequency altogether, thereby providing a perfect frequency ruler in which
ид = ЧЕ.

(с)
ОЕС

= и Vg Во ИР 724
(а) I А О О О О О и

it и
ги
Qu,
wo || Lee; yyy yyy fy
и
Figure 16.4-11 (а) Spectrum of ап octave-spanning optical frequency comb. (65) Frequency-
doubled spectrum of the comb in (а). (с) Beating these two spectra yields the offset frequency и;

Precise measurement of optical frequency. Ап OFC may be used to increase the
precision of an optical-frequency measurement made with a conventional wavelength-
sensitive spectrum analyzer. If the coarse measurement of the frequency иг of a
monochromatic light source such as a CW laser is approximately equal to a multiple
of the frequency spacing of an OFC, 1.е., if иг = дик, the precision of the frequency
measurement can be enhanced by beating the two optical fields. The smallest beat
frequency иг — (дир + 1) is then used to calculate a more precise value of vz. The
process is akin to making use of a Vernier scale such as that used to obtain fractional
readings from a uniformly divided ruler. In the event that the offset frequency 1; is not
known, then both и; and the correction иг — дик may be determined by beating the
OFC once with the CW laser, and again with a frequency-doubled version thereof, as

READING LIST 723
OFC
Vy
CW Laser
yo MLL MELLELLELL
О ОИ ОИ ror rete rr yore ro ro ror ror ror ror por bro ro ro ror bo tor ror rrr
Vy, 2, у
CW Laser | : |
Porro otototrot otro to tot Porro toro to rotor tt ОО ОО ОО |
и
Figure 16.4-12 Precise measurement of the frequency of а CW laser by beating an octave-
spanning OFC once with the CW laser, and again with a second-harmonic of the CW laser.
illustrated in Fig. 16.4-12. Since vz = vq and Зиг = ира, the resultant beat frequencies
are, respectively:
Vo = Ир — (Que + и;) = (VL — дик) — и; (16.4-33)
м, = Зиг — (24ие +) = 2(vz_ — див) — и. (16.4-34)
Solving (16.4-33) and (16.4-34) yields both the offset frequency и; = и — 2v, and the
correction иг — qvr = И — Vg. This analysis assumes that the OFC is octave spanning
and that дир lies toward the low-frequency side of the comb.

Extreme-ultraviolet and X-ray OFCs. As indicated earlier, the frequencies v,
of OFCs generated using mode-locked lasers usually fall in the visible region of the
spectrum while the pulse repetition rates ир = c/2d typically range from tens of
MHz to hundreds of GHz, depending on the length d of the Fabry—Perot laser res-
onator (Sec. 11.1A). In recent years, high-harmonic generation (HHG, Sec. 23.5D)
has emerged as an alternative technique for generating optical frequency combs. The
HHG approach is distinct from mode locking and has made it possible to substantially
increase the frequency spacings and frequency reach of OFCs. An optical frequency
comb generated via HHG exhibits spacings between adjacent frequency components
that lie at twice the frequency of the exciting laser, which typically operates in the
near or mid infrared. OFC difference frequencies (and pulse repetition rates) are thus
in the vicinity of hundreds of THz, orders of magnitude greater than those obtained
using mode-locking techniques. Moreover, at high gas pressures the highest frequency
components of OFCs generated via HHG can stretch to the SXR region (Fig. 16.3-7).
The pulse trains associated with HHG-generated OFCs exhibit attosecond structure.

READING LIST
Lasers
See also the reading list in Chapter 15.
D. Meschede, Optics, Light and Lasers: The Practical Approach to Modern Aspects of Photonics and

Laser Physics, Wiley-VCH, 3rd ed. 2017.

К. Е Renk, Basics of Laser Physics: For Students of Science and Engineering, Springer-Verlag, 2nd

ed. 2017.

M. Prelas, Nuclear-Pumped Lasers, Springer-Verlag, 2016.
У. У. Apollonov, High Energy Molecular Lasers: Self-Controlled Volume-Discharge Lasers and

Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2016.

724 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

B. Zohuri, Directed Energy Weapons: Physics of High Energy Lasers (HEL), Springer-Verlag, 2016.

С. С. Davis, Lasers and Electro-Optics: Fundamentals and Engineering, Cambridge, 2nd ed. 2014.

Е. Trager, ed., Springer Handbook of Lasers and Optics, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2012.

P. W. Milonni and J. H. Eberly, Laser Physics, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2010.

О. Svelto, Principles of Lasers, Springer-Verlag, paperback Sth ed. 2010.

W. T. Silfvast, Laser Fundamentals, Cambridge University Press, paperback 2nd ed. 2008.

R. Paschotta, Field Guide to Lasers, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2008.

A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Photonics: Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, Oxford University
Press, 6th ed. 2006.

J.-M. Liu, Photonic Devices, Cambridge University Press, 2005, paperback ed. 2009.

М. G. Вазоу, А. $. Bashkin, У. I. Igoshin, A. М. Oraevsky, and У. A. Shcheglov, Chemical Lasers,
Springer-Verlag, 1990, paperback ed. 2011.

A. E. Siegman, Lasers, University Science, 1986.

Solid-State Lasers

S. B. Mirov, V. V. Fedorov, D. Martyshkin, I. S. Moskalev, M. Mirov, and S. Vasilyev, Progress in
Mid-IR Lasers Based on Cr and Fe-Doped II-VI Chalcogenides, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Quantum Electronics, vol. 21, 1601719, 2015.

A. Ikesue, Y. L. Aung, and V. Lupei, Ceramic Lasers, Cambridge University Press, 2013.

W. Koechner, Solid-State Laser Engineering, Springer-Verlag, 6th ed. 2006.

У. У. Ter-Mikirtychev, ed., Selected Papers on Tunable Solid-State Lasers, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 173), 2002.

Г. О. DeLoach, К. H. Page, G. D. Wilke, S. A. Payne, and W. Е. Krupke, Transition Metal-Doped
Zinc Chalcogenides: Spectroscopy and Laser Demonstration of a New Class of Gain Media, JEEE
Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. 32, рр. 885-895, 1996.

РЕ Moulton, Spectroscopic and Laser Characteristics of Ti:A1203, Journal of the Optical Society
of America В, vol. 3, рр. 125—133, 1986.

Т.Е. Geusic, H. М. Marcos, and L. С. Van Uitert, Laser Oscillations in Nd-Doped Yttrium Aluminum,
Yttrium Gallium and Gadolinium Garnets, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 4, рр. 182—184, 1964.

P. P. Sorokin and M. J. Stevenson, Stimulated Infrared Emission from Trivalent Uranium, Physical
Review Letters, vol. 5, pp. 557-559, 1960.

T. H. Maiman, Stimulated Optical Radiation in Ruby, Nature, vol. 187, pp. 493-494, 1960.

Fiber, Stimulated-Raman, and Stimulated-Brillouin Lasers

J. Hecht, High-Power Fiber Lasers, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 30-37, 2018.

L. Dong and B. Samson, Fiber Lasers: Basics, Technology, and Applications, CRC Press, 2017.

S. Fu, W. Shi, Y. Feng, L. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Xu, X. Zhu, R. A. Norwood, and N. Peyghambarian,
Review of Recent Progress on Single-Frequency Fiber Lasers, Journal of the Optical Society of
America В, vol. 34, рр. A49-A62, 2017.

P. Zhou, H. Xiao, J. Leng, J. Xu, Z. Chen, H. Zhang, and Z. Liu, High-Power Fiber Lasers Based on
Tandem Pumping, Journal of the Optical Society of America В, vol. 34, pp. А29-АЗ6, 2017.

У. R. Supradeepa, У. Feng, and J. W. Nicholson, Raman Fiber Lasers, Journal of Optics, vol. 19,
023001, 2017.

N. K. Dutta, Fiber Amplifiers and Fiber Lasers, World Scientific, 2015.

М. М. Zervas and С. A. Codemard, High Power Fiber Lasers: A Review, IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 20, 0904123, 2014.

H. Rong, A. Liu, R. Jones, O. Cohen, D. Hak, R. Nicolaescu, A. Fang, and M. Paniccia, An All-
Silicon Raman Laser, Nature, vol. 433, pp. 292—294, 2005.

О. Boyraz and В. Jalali, Demonstration of a Silicon Raman Laser, Optics Express, vol. 12, pp. 5269-
5273, 2004.

T. J. Kippenberg, S. M. Spillane, B. Min, and K. J. Vahala, Theoretical and Experimental Study of
Stimulated and Cascaded Raman Scattering in Ultrahigh-Q Optical Microcavities, IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol 10, pp. 1219-1228, 2004.

М. Л.Е Digonnet, ed., Rare-Earth-Doped Fiber Lasers and Amplifiers, CRC Press, 2nd ed. 2001.

READING LIST 725

р. С. Hanna, К. М. Percival, I. В. Perry, R. G. Smart, P. J. Suni, J. E. Townsend, and A. С. Tropper,
Continuous-Wave Oscillation of a Monomode Ytterbium-Doped Fibre Laser, Electronics Letters,
vol. 24, pp. 1111-1113, 1988.

M. E. Fermann, D. C. Hanna, D. P. Shepherd, P. J. Suni, and J. E. Townsend, Efficient Operation of
an Yb-Sensitised Er Fibre Laser at 1.56 ит, Electronics Letters, vol. 24, рр. 1135-1136, 1988.

K. O. Hill, B. S. Kawasaki, and D. C. Johnson, CW Brillouin Laser, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 28,
рр. 608—609, 1976.

Е. Snitzer, Laser Emission at 1.06 и from М№93+-—УЪ3З+ Glass, IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics,
vol. QE-2, рр. 562-566, 1966.

Е. Snitzer, Proposed Fiber Cavities for Optical Masers, Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 32, pp. 36—
39, 1961.

E. Snitzer, Optical Maser Action of Nd*+ in a Barium Crown Glass, Physical Review Letters, vol. 7,
pp. 444-446, 1961.

Random Lasers

J. Mysliwiec, K. Cyprych, L. Sznitko and A. Miniewicz, Biomaterials in Light Amplification, Journal
of Optics, vol. 19, 033003, 2017.

$. Е. Yu, Electrically Pumped Random Lasers, Journal of Physics О, vol. 48, 483001, 2015.

М. С. Gather and $. H. Yun, Single-Cell Biological Lasers, Nature Photonics, vol. 5, рр. 406—410,
2011.

V. Letokhov and S. Johansson, Astrophysical Lasers, Oxford University Press, 2009.

D.S. Wiersma, The Physics and Applications of Random Lasers, Nature Physics, vol. 4, рр. 359-367,
2008.

М. А. Noginov, Solid-State Random Lasers, Springer-Verlag, 2005.

H. Cao, Lasing in Disordered Media, in E. Wolf, ed., Progress in Optics, North-Holland, 2003,
vol. 45, рр. 317-370.

H. Cao, Y. G. Zhao, S. T. Ho, E. W. Seelig, Q. H. Wang, and R. P. H. Chang, Random Laser Action
in Semiconductor Powder, Physical Review Letters, vol. 82, pp. 2278—2281, 1999.

N. M. Lawandy, R. M. Balachandran, A. S. L. Gomes, and E. Sauvain, Laser Action in Strongly
Scattering Media, Nature, vol. 368, pp. 436-438, 1994.

M. Elitzur, Astronomical Masers, Springer-Verlag/Kluwer, 1992.

M. J. Mumma, D. Buhl, G. Chin, D. Deming, F. Espenak, and T. Kostiuk, Discovery of Natural
Gain Amplification in the 10 4m СО> Laser Bands on Mars: A Natural Laser, Science, vol. 212,
рр. 45-49, 1981.

Е. Varsanyi, Surface Lasers, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 19, pp. 169-171, 1971.

V. S. Letokhov, Generation of Light by a Scattering Medium with Negative Resonance Absorption,
Soviet Physics-JETP, vol. 26, pp. 835-840, 1968 [Zhurnal Eksperimental’noi i Teoreticheskoi
Fiziki, vol. 53, рр. 1442-1447, 1967].

X-Ray and Free-Electron Lasers

H. P. Freund and T. M. Antonsen, Jr., Principles of Free-Electron Lasers, Springer, 3rd ed. 2018.

K.-J. Kim, Z. Huang, and R. Lindberg, Synchrotron Radiation and Free-Electron Lasers: Principles
of Coherent X-Ray Generation, Cambridge University Press, 2017.

C. A. MacDonald, An Introduction to X-Ray Physics, Optics, and Applications, Princeton, 2017.

D. Attwood and A. Sakdinawat, X-Rays and Extreme Ultraviolet Radiation: Principles and Applica-
tions, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2016.

C. Pellegrini, A. Marinelli, and S. Reiche, The Physics of X-Ray Free-Electron Lasers, Reviews of
Modern Physics, vol. 88, 015006, 2016.

С. Bostedt, 5. Boutet, О. М. Fritz, Z. Huang, H. J. Lee, H. T. Lemke, A. Robert, W. Е. Schlotter,
J. J. Turner, and G. J. Williams, Linac Coherent Light Source: The First Five Years, Reviews of
Modern Physics, vol. 88, 015007, 2016.

F. Canova and L. Poletto, eds., Optical Technologies for Extreme-Ultraviolet and Soft X-Ray Coherent
Sources, Springer-Verlag, 2015.

P. H. Bucksbaum and N. Berrah, Brighter and Faster: The Promise and Challenge of the X-Ray Free-
Electron Laser, Physics Today, vol. 68, по. 7, рр. 26-32, 2015.

726 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

P. Schmiiser, M. Dohlus, J. Rossbach, and C. Behrens, Free-Electron Lasers in the Ultraviolet and
X-Ray Regime, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2014.

C. Pellegrini, The History of X-ray Free-Electron Lasers, The European Physical Journal H, vol. 37,
рр. 659-708, 2012.

J. М. Galayda, J. Arthur, О. Е. Ratner, and W. Е. White, X-ray Free-Electron Lasers — Present and
Future Capabilities, Journal of the Optical Society of America В, vol. 27, pp. В106-В118, 2010.

S. Suckewer and P. Jaeglé, X-Ray Laser: Past, Present, and Future, Laser Physics Letters, vol. 6,
pp. 411-436, 2009.

J. Hecht, The History of the X-ray Laser, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 19, по. 5, pp. 26-33, 2008.

P. Jaeglé, Coherent Sources of XUV Radiation: Soft X-Ray Lasers and High-Order Harmonic Gener-
ation, Springer-Verlag, 2006, paperback ed. 2010.

D. M. Paganin, Coherent X-Ray Optics, Oxford University Press, 2006, paperback ed. 2013.

E. L. Saldin, E. A. Schneidmiller, and M. V. Yurkov, The Physics of Free Electron Lasers, Springer-
Verlag, 2000.

К. W. Waynant and М. М. Ediger, eds., Selected Papers on UV, VUV, and X-Ray Lasers, SPIE Optical
Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 71), 1993.

P. Luchini and H. Motz, Undulators and Free-Electron Lasers, Oxford University Press, 1990.

R. C. Elton, X-Ray Lasers, Academic Press, 1990.

T. C. Marshall, Free-Electron Lasers, Macmillan, 1985.

D. L. Matthews, P. L. Hagelstein, M. D. Rosen, M. J. Eckart, N. M. Ceglio, A. U. Hazi, H. Medecki,
B. J. MacGowan, J. E. Trebes, B. L. Whitten, E. M. Campbell, C. W. Hatcher, A. M. Hawryluk,
R. L. Kauffman, L. D. Pleasance, G. Rambach, J. H. Scofield, G. Stone, and T. A. Weaver,
Demonstration of a Soft X-Ray Amplifier, Physical Review Letters, vol. 54, pp. 110-113, 1985.

Р. Jaeglé, G. Jamelot, A. Carillon, A. Sureau, and Р. Dhez, Superradiant Line in the Soft-X-Ray
Range, Physical Review Letters, vol. 33, pp. 1070-1073, 1974.

J. M. J. Madey, Stimulated Emission of Bremsstrahlung in a Periodic Magnetic Field, Journal of
Applied Physics, vol. 42, pp. 1906-1913, 1971.

M. A. Duguay and P. M. Rentzepis, Some Approaches to Vacuum UV and X-Ray Lasers, Applied
Physics Letters, vol. 10, pp. 350-352, 1967.

Pulsed Lasers and Optical Frequency Combs

I. Coddington, N. Newbury, and W. Swann, Dual-Comb Spectroscopy, Optica, vol. 3, pp. 414-426,
2016.

P. H. Bucksbaum, Sources and Science of Attosecond Light, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 26, no. 5,
pp. 28-35, 2015.

W. Н. Renninger and Е. W. Wise, Fundamental Limits to Mode-Locked Lasers: Toward Terawatt
Peak Powers, [EEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 21, 1100208, 2015.

М. Е. Fermann and I. Hartl, Ultrafast Fibre Lasers, Nature Photonics, vol. 7, рр. 868-874, 2013.

Р. С. Kryukov, Continuous-Wave Femtosecond Lasers, Physics-Uspekhi, vol. 56, pp. 849-867, 2013.

Г. М. Binh and N. О. Ngo, Ultra-Fast Fiber Lasers, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2011.

S. A. Diddams, The Evolving Optical Frequency Comb, Journal of the Optical Society of America B,
vol. 27, рр. В51-В62, 2010.

R. Paschotta, Field Guide to Laser Pulse Generation, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2008.

T. W. Hansch, Nobel Lecture: Passion for Precision, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 78, pp. 1297—
1309, 2006.

J. L. Hall, Nobel Lecture: Defining and Measuring Optical Frequencies, Reviews of Modern Physics,
vol. 78, pp. 1279-1295, 2006.

J. Ye and S. T. Cundiff, eds., Femtosecond Optical Frequency Comb Technology: Principle, Opera-
tion and Application, Springer-Verlag, 2005, paperback ed. 2010.

L. E. Hargrove, R. L. Fork, and M. A. Pollack, Locking of He-Ne Laser Modes Induced by Syn-
chronous Intracavity Modulation, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 5, pp. 4—5, 1964.

Popular and Review

T. H. Maiman, The Laser Inventor: Memoirs of Theodore H. Maiman, Springer-Verlag, 2018.

READING LIST 727

M. Bertolotti, Masers and Lasers: An Historical Approach, CRC Press, 2nd ed. 2015.

Special Issue, The Laser at 50, Physics World, vol. 23, no. 5, May 2010.

J. Hecht, Understanding Lasers: An Entry Level Guide, Wiley-IEEE, paperback 3rd ed. 2008.

J. Hecht, Beam: The Race to Make the Laser, Oxford University Press, 2005.

К. L. Walsworth, The Maser at 50, Science, vol. 306, pp. 236-237, 2004.

Millennium issue, JEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 6, no. 6, 2000.

C. H. Townes, How the Laser Happened: Adventures of a Scientist, Oxford University Press, 1999.

J. L. Bromberg, The Birth of the Laser, Physics Today, vol. 41, по. 10, pp. 26-33, 1988.

J. Hecht, ed., Laser Pioneer Interviews, High Tech Publications, 1985.

A. Kastler, Birth of the Maser and Laser, Nature, vol. 316, pp. 307-309, 1985.

Special issue, Twenty-Five Years of the Laser, Optica Acta (Journal of Modern Optics), vol. 32,
no. 9/10, 1985.

C. H. Townes, Science, Technology, and Invention: Their Progress and Interactions, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences (USA), vol. 80, pp. 7679-7683, 1983.

А. L. Schawlow, Maser and Laser, [EEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. ED-23, pp. 773-779,
1976.

W. E. Lamb, Jr., Physical Concepts in the Development of the Maser and Laser, in B. Kursunoglu
and A. Perlmutter, eds., Impact of Basic Research on Technology, Plenum, 1973.

C. Cohen-Tannoudji and A. Kastler, Optical Pumping, in E. Wolf, ed., Progress in Optics, North-
Holland, 1966, vol. 5, pp. 1-81.

A. Yariv and J. P. Gordon, The Laser, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 51, рр. 4-29, 1963.

Historical and Reprint Collections

See also the reading list on historical articles in Chapter 18.

W. T. Silfvast, ed., Selected Papers on Fundamentals of Lasers, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 70), 1993.

D. O’Shea and D. C. Peckham, eds., Lasers: Selected Reprints, American Association of Physics
Teachers, 1982.

A. L. Schawlow, Spectroscopy in a New Light (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1981), Reviews of Modern
Physics, vol. 54, pp. 697—707, 1982.

D. C. O’Shea and D. C. Peckham, eds., Resource Letter L-1: Lasers, American Journal of Physics,
vol. 49, pp. 915-925, 1981.

Е. 5. Barnes, ed., Laser Theory, IEEE Press Reprint Series, IEEE Press, 1972.

J. Weber, ed., Lasers: Selected Reprints with Editorial Comment, CRC Press, 1967.

A. Kastler, Optical Methods for Studying Hertzian Resonances (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1966), in
Nobel Lectures in Physics, 1963—1970, World Scientific, 1998, pp. 186-204.

C. H. Townes, Production of Coherent Radiation by Atoms and Molecules (Nobel Lecture in Physics,
1964), in Nobel Lectures in Physics, 1963—1970, World Scientific, 1998, pp. 58-86.

N. G. Basov, Semiconductor Lasers (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1964), in Nobel Lectures in Physics,
1963-1970, World Scientific, 1998, pp. 89-105.

A. M. Prokhorov, Quantum Electronics (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1964), in Nobel Lectures in
Physics, 1963-1970, World Scientific, 1998, pp. 110-116.

W. Е. Lamb, Jr., Theory of an Optical Maser, Physical Review, vol. 134, pp. А1429-А1450, 1964.

A. Javan, W. R. Bennett, Jr., and D. R. Herriott, Population Inversion and Continuous Optical Maser
Oscillation in a Gas Discharge Containing a He-Ne Mixture, Physical Review Letters, vol. 6,
рр. 106-110, 1961.

T. H. Maiman, Stimulated Optical Radiation in Ruby, Nature, vol. 187, рр. 493—494, 1960.

R. H. Dicke, Molecular Amplification and Generation Systems and Methods, U.S. Patent 2,851,652,
Patented September 9, 1958.

А. Г. Schawlow and С. H. Townes, Infrared and Optical Masers, Physical Review, vol. 112, pp. 1940-
1949, 1958.

J. Р. Gordon, H. J. Zeiger, and С. H. Townes, The Maser—New Type of Microwave Amplifier,
Frequency Standard, and Spectrometer, Physical Review, vol. 99, pp. 1264—1274, 1955.

728 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

N. G. Basov and A. M. Prokhorov, Possible Methods of Obtaining Active Molecules for a Molec-
ular Oscillator, Soviet Physics-JETP, vol. 1, рр. 184-185, 1955 [Zhurnal Eksperimental’noi i
Teoreticheskoi Fiziki, vol. 28, рр. 249-250, 1955].

J. Р. Gordon, H. J. Zeiger, and C. H. Townes, Molecular Microwave Oscillator and New Hyperfine
Structure in the Microwave Spectrum of NH3, Physical Review, vol. 95, pp. 282-284, 1954.

V. A. Fabrikant, The Emission Mechanism of Gas Discharges, Trudi Vsyesoyuznogo Elektrotekhnich-
eskogo Instituta (Reports of the All-Union Electrotechnical Institute, Moscow), vol. 41, Elektron-
nie i Jonnie Pribori (Electron and Ion Devices), pp. 236-296, 1940.

К. Ladenburg, Dispersion in Electrically Excited Gases, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 5, pp. 243—
256, 1933.

H. Kopfermann and R. Ladenburg, Experimental Proof of ‘Negative Dispersion, Nature, vol. 122,
pp. 438-439, 1928.

A. Einstein, Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung, Physikalische Zeitschrift, vol. 18, pp. 121-128, 1917
[Translation: On the Quantum Theory of Radiation, in D. ter Haar, The Old Quantum Theory,
Pergamon, 1967].

PROBLEMS

16.2-2 Number of Longitudinal Modes. An Art -ion laser has a resonator of length 100 cm. The
refractive index n = 1.

(a) Determine the frequency spacing ик between the resonator modes.

(b) Determine the number of longitudinal modes that the laser can sustain if the FWHM
Doppler-broadened linewidth is Avy = 3.5 GHz and the loss coefficient is half the
peak small-signal gain coefficient.

(c) What would the resonator length d have to be to achieve operation on a single longi-
tudinal mode? What would that length be for a СО.) laser, which has a much smaller
Doppler linewidth Ди» = 60 MHz under the same conditions?

16.2-3 Frequency Drift of the Laser Modes. A He-Ne laser has the following characteristics:
(1) A resonator with 97% and 100% mirror reflectances and negligible internal losses; (2) a
Doppler-broadened atomic transition with Doppler linewidth Ди, = 1.5 GHz; and (3) а
small-signal peak gain coefficient Yg(v9) = 2.5x 10-3 cm~!. While the laser is running, the
frequencies of its longitudinal modes drift with time as a result of small thermally induced
changes in the length of the resonator. Find the allowable range of resonator lengths such
that the laser will always oscillate in one or two (but not more) longitudinal modes. The
refractive index n = 1.

16.2-4 Mode Control Using an Etalon. А Doppler-broadened gas laser operates at 515 nm in a
resonator with two mirrors separated by a distance of 50 cm. The photon lifetime is 0.33 ns.
The spectral window within which oscillation can occur is of width B = 1.5 GHz. The
refractive index n = 1. To select a single mode, the light is passed into an etalon (a passive
Fabry—Perot resonator) whose mirrors are separated by the distance d and its finesse is F.
The etalon acts as a filter. Suggest suitable values of d and 5. Is it better to place the etalon
inside or outside the laser resonator?

16.2-5 Modal Powers in a Multimode Laser. A He-Ne laser operating at Л, = 632.8 nm
produces 50 mW of multimode power at its output. It has an inhomogeneously broadened
gain profile with a Doppler linewidth Ди, = 1.5 GHz and the refractive index п, = 1. The
resonator is 30 cm long.

(a) If the maximum small-signal gain coefficient is twice the loss coefficient, determine the
number of longitudinal modes of the laser.

(b) If the mirrors are adjusted to maximize the intensity of the strongest mode, estimate its
power.

16.2-6 Output of a Single-Mode Gas Laser. Consider a 10-cm-long gas laser operating at the
center of the 600-nm line in a single longitudinal and single transverse mode. The mirror
reflectances are R,; = 99% and Ry = 100%. The refractive index п = 1 and the effective
area of the output beam is 1 mm?. The small-signal gain coefficient Yo(v) = 0.1 cm!
and the saturation photon-flux density ¢, = 1.43 x 10!° photons/cm?-s.

(a) Determine the distributed loss coefficients, @,,; and ат, associated with each of the
mirrors separately. Assuming that a, = 0, find the resonator loss coefficient си...

PROBLEMS 729

(b) Find the photon lifetime ть.

(с) Determine the output photon-flux density фо and the output power P,.

16.2-7 Transmittance of a Laser Resonator. Monochromatic light from a tunable optical source
is transmitted through the optical resonator of an unpumped gas laser. The observed trans-
mittance, as a function of frequency, is shown in Fig. P16.2-7.

[= 200 MHz >|
5x 1014 Hz и
Figure P16.2-7 Transmittance of a laser resonator.

(a) Determine the resonator length, the photon lifetime, and the threshold gain coefficient
of the laser. Assume that the refractive index n = 1.

(b) Assuming that the central frequency of the laser transition is 5 x 10М Hz, sketch
the transmittance versus frequency if the laser is now pumped but the pumping is not
sufficient for laser oscillation to occur.

16.2-8 Rate Equations for a Four-Level Laser. Consider a four-level laser with an active volume
У = 1cm‘%. The population densities of the upper and lower laser levels are Nz and N, and
N = Nz — N,. The pumping rate is such that the steady-state population difference № in
the absence of the stimulated emission and absorption is No. The photon-number density is
п, and the photon lifetime is т». Write the rate equations for Nz, №1, №, and n in terms of
No, the transition cross section o(v), and the times ts,, 71, То, T21, and т». Determine the
steady-state values of N and n.

16.3-1 Operation of an Ytterbium-Doped YAG Laser. Yb**:YAG is a rare-earth-doped dielec-
tric material that lases at Л, = 1.030 jum on the ?F'/2 —> ?F7,2 transition (see Tables 14.1-1,
15.3-1, 16.3-1, and Fig. 16.3-2). This three-level laser is usually optically pumped with an
array of InGaAs laser diodes.

(a) The pump band (level @)) has a central energy of 1.31915 eV and a width of 0.02475
eV. Determine the free-space wavelength of the desired laser-diode pump and the width
of the absorption band in nm.

(b) At the central frequency of the laser transition м, the peak transition cross section
00 = 0(v%) = 2 x 10-20 cm?. Given that the Yb**-ion doping density is set at М, =
1.4 x 1029 cm~3, determine the absorption and gain coefficients of the material at the
center of the line, a(vp) = —y(vo). Assume that the material is in thermal equilibrium
at T = 300° К (1.е., there is no pumping).

(c) Consider a laser rod constructed from this material with a length of 6 cm and a diameter
of 2 mm. One of its ends is polished to a reflectance of 80% (R; = 0.8) while the other
is polished to unity reflectance (Rp = 1.0). Assuming that there is no scattering, and
that there are no other extraneous losses, determine the resonator loss coefficient a, and
the resonator photon lifetime ть.

(4) As the laser is pumped, the gain coefficient y(vo) increases from its initial negative
value at thermal equilibrium and changes sign, thereby providing gain. Determine the
threshold population difference №, for laser oscillation.

(е) Why is it advantageous to have the energy of level @) close to that of level @?

(Г) How might the operation of the laser change if yttrium vanadate (YVO,) were substi-
tuted for YAG (Y3AI1;Oj;2) as the host material?

16.3-2 Threshold Population Difference for an Ar* -Ion Laser. Ап Ar* -ion laser has a 1-m-long
resonator with 98% and 100% mirror reflectances. Other loss mechanisms are negligible.
The atomic transition has a central wavelength Л. = 515 nm, spontaneous lifetime ts, =
10 ns, and linewidth AX = 0.003 nm. The lower energy level has a very short lifetime and
hence zero population. The diameter of the oscillating mode is 1 mm. Determine
(a) the photon lifetime.

(b) the threshold population difference for laser action.

730 CHAPTER 16 LASERS

16.3-3 Spontaneous Lifetime of an EUV Transition. A visible laser transition at A, = 500 nm
has a spontaneous lifetime ¢,,, = 10 ns. Estimate the spontaneous lifetime for an EUV laser
transition at Л. = 18.2 nm, assuming that the transition strength 5 is the same in both cases.

Compare your result with that provided in Table 15.3-1.

*16.4-4 Transients in a Gain-Switched Laser.

(a) Introduce the new variables Х = n/7,, У = N/N,, and the normalized time s = &/ть,
to demonstrate that the rate equations (16.4-3) and (16.4-6) take the form

dX/ds=—-X+XY and = dY/ds=a(Y—Y)-2XY,
where а = 7,/tsp and Yo = No/Nx.

(b) Solve these two equations for both switching on and switching off. Assume that Yo is
switched from 0 to 2 to turn the laser on, and from 2 to 0 to turn it off. Assume further
that an initially very small photon flux corresponding to Х = 10-5 starts the oscillation
at t = 0. Speculate on the possible origin of this flux. Determine the switching transient
times for a = 10-3, 1, and 103. Comment on the significance of your results.

*16.4-5  @-Switched Ruby Laser Power. A (Q-switched ruby laser makes use of a 15-cm-long rod
of cross-sectional area 1 cm? placed in a resonator of length 20 cm. The mirrors have
reflectances R, = 0.95 and R = 0.7. The Cr?* density is 1.58 x 1019 atoms/cm’, and
the transition cross section o(v) = 2 x 10-20 cm?. The laser is pumped to an initial
population of 101? atoms/ cm? in the upper state with negligible population in the lower
state. The pump band (level @)) is centered at = 450 nm and the decay from level @) to
level @ is fast. The lifetime of level @ is 3 ms.

(a) How much pump power is required to maintain the population in level @ at 1019 cm~3?

(b) How much power is spontaneously radiated before the Q-switch is operated?

(с) Determine the peak power, energy, and duration of the Q-switched pulse.

*16.4-6 Operation of a Cavity-Dumped Laser. Sketch the variation of the threshold population
difference N;, (which is proportional to the loss), the population difference M(t), the internal
photon number density n(t), and the external photon-flux density ¢,(t), during two cycles
of operation of a pulsed cavity-dumped laser.

16.4-7 Mode Locking with Lorentzian Amplitudes. Assume that the envelopes of the modes of

a mode-locked laser are given by

(Av /2)?
Ад = УРА, = —00,...,0,
ТУР ие У a

and the phases are all equal. Determine expressions for the following parameters of the

generated pulse train:

(a) Mean power

(b) Peak power

(c) Pulse duration (FWHM)

16.4-8 Second-Harmonic Generation. Crystals with nonlinear optical properties are often used
for second-harmonic generation, as explained in Sec. 22.2A. In this process, two photons

of frequency v are converted into a single photon of frequency 2v. Assume that such a

crystal is placed inside a laser resonator with an active medium providing gain at frequency

и. The frequencies и and 2v correspond to two modes of the resonator. If the rate of

second-harmonic conversion is См (s~!-m~%) and the rate of photon production by the

laser process (net effect of stimulated emission and absorption) is €n (s~'-m~3), where С

and & are constants, write the rate equations for the photon number densities n and ng at

the frequencies и and 2v. Assume that the photon lifetimes at и and 2v are 7, and тр2,
respectively. Determine the steady-state values of n and ng.

CHAPTER
[|
17.1 SEMICONDUCTORS 733

А. Energy Bands and Charge Carriers
B. Semiconductor Materials
C. Carrier Concentrations
D. Generation, Recombination, and Injection
E. Junctions
F. Heterojunctions
G. Quantum-Confined Structures
17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 766
A. Photon Interactions in Bulk Semiconductors
В. Interband Transitions in Bulk Semiconductors
C. Absorption, Emission, and Gain in Bulk Semiconductors
D. Photon Interactions in Quantum-Confined Structures
E. Quantum-Dot Single-Photon Emitters
F. Refractive Index
” . ? Е { |
=e ‘~ №
aS т — —
ai Е] = \
William В. Shockley (1910-1989), seated, John Bardeen (1908-1991), center, and Walter H.
Brattain (1902-1987), right, shared the Nobel Prize in 1956 for demonstrating that semiconductor
devices could be used to achieve amplification.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
731

CSC
Photonics is the technology of controlling the flow of photons, much as electron-
ics is the technology of controlling the flow of charge carriers (electrons and holes).
These two technologies join together in semiconductor optics: photons generate mobile
charge carriers, and charge carriers generate and control the flow of photons. Semicon-
ductor devices serve as photon sources (light-emitting diodes and laser diodes), am-
plifiers, photodetectors, waveguides, modulators, multiplexers, sensors, and nonlinear
optical elements. The compatibility of semiconductor optical devices and semiconduc-
tor electronic devices has fostered the development of both.
Semiconductor materials absorb and emit photons by undergoing transitions among
allowed energy levels. Though the basic rules that govern these interactions are the
same as those set forth for photons and atoms in Sec. 14.3, semiconductors have a
number of unique features, as outlined in Sec. 14.1D:
= Because of the proximity of atoms in a crystal lattice, a semiconductor material
should not be viewed as a collection of noninteracting atoms, each with its own
individual energy levels. Rather, the energy levels belong to the system as a whole.

= Collections of closely spaced energy levels form energy bands. In the absence of
external excitation, these bands are either fully occupied by electrons or totally
unoccupied at Т = 0° К. The highest-lying fully occupied energy band is known
as the valence band while the lowest-lying unoccupied energy band is called
the conduction band. These two bands are separated by a forbidden band, with
bandgap energy E,.

= An external energy source (whether thermal, optical, or electronic) can impart
energy to an electron in the valence band, causing it to jump across the forbidden
band and enter the conduction band. This transition leaves behind a vacancy
(hole) in the valence band. In the inverse process, electron—hole recombination,
an electron decays from the conduction band to fill an empty state in the valence
band (provided that one is accessible), generating a photon and/or phonons in the
process. Thus, photons interact with both types of charge carriers, electrons and
holes.

Two processes are fundamental to the operation of most semiconductor optical
devices:

1. The absorption of a photon can create an electron-hole pair. Mobile charge
carriers resulting from the absorption of a photon alter the electrical properties
of the semiconductor. This process is the basis of operation of photoconductive
photodetectors.

2. The recombination of an electron and a hole can result in the emission of a
photon. This process is responsible for the operation of semiconductor photon
sources. Spontaneous radiative electron-hole recombination gives rise to photon
generation in the light-emitting diode. Stimulated electron-hole recombination
generates photons in a laser diode.

This Chapter

The reader is expected to be familiar with the basic principles of semiconductor
physics. In Sec. 17.1 we offer a review of semiconductors and their properties.
Section 17.2 provides an introduction to the optical properties of bulk and quantum-
confined semiconductors. We present a simplified theory of absorption, spontaneous
emission, and stimulated emission patterned on the approach to the interaction of
photons with atoms provided in Sec. 14.3.

This and the following two chapters form a unit. Chapter 18 deals with the operation
of semiconductor sources such as light-emitting diodes and laser diodes. Chapter 19 is
devoted to semiconductor photodetectors.

732

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 733
17.1 SEMICONDUCTORS
As discussed in Sec. 14.1D, a semiconductor is a crystalline or amorphous solid whose
electrical conductivity is typically intermediate between that of a metal and that of an
insulator. Its conductivity can be significantly altered by modifying the temperature
or doping concentration of the material, or by illuminating it with light. The band
structure of semiconductors, and the ability to form junctions and heterostructures,
offer unique properties. Quantum-confined semiconductor structures further extend
the range of available features. As will be elucidated in Sec. 17.1B, semiconductor
optical devices often rely on Ш-У ternary or quaternary compounds (e.g., InGaAsP,
AlInGaP, or AlInGaN), but also make use of organic semiconductors and, increasingly,
compounds forged from elements residing in group-IV of the periodic table (e.g., C,
Si, Ge, and Sn). Electronic semiconductor devices are principally fabricated from Si.
A. Energy Bands and Charge Carriers
Energy Bands in Bulk Semiconductors
The atoms comprising solid-state materials have sufficiently strong interatomic interac-
tions that they cannot be treated as individual entities (Sec. 14.1D). Their conduction
electrons are not bound to individual atoms; rather, they belong to the collection of
atoms as a whole. The solution of the Schrédinger equation for the electron energy, in
the periodic potential created by the collection of atoms in the crystal lattice, results
in a splitting of the atomic energy levels and the formation of energy bands. Each
band contains a large number of densely packed discrete energy levels that is well
approximated as a continuum. As illustrated in Fig. 17.1-1, the valence and conduction
bands are separated by a forbidden band or bandgap. The bandgap energy E, plays
an important role in determining the electrical and optical properties of the material.
Si GaAs
| 5 5
Conduction band \Eg Conduction band + Ey

& “112 еУ 0 ра 142 eV 0

5 + 5 1

> Valence band > Valence band

ay Pe

Е -5 2 -5

isa} aa

-10 —10
-15 -15

Figure 17.1-1 Energy bands in Si and GaAs. The bandgap energy Е’, which separates the valence
and conduction bands, is 1.12 eV for Si and 1.42 eV for GaAs at room temperature.

The origin of the bandgap may be illustrated by means of the Kronig—Penney
model. In this simple theory the crystal-lattice potential, a one-dimensional version
of which is depicted in Fig. 17.1-2(а), is approximated by a 1D periodic rectangular-
barrier potential, as shown in Fig. 17.1-2(b). The solution of the associated Schrédinger
equation (14.1-3) for this potential yields allowed energy bands with traveling-wave
solutions, separated by forbidden bands with exponentially decaying solutions. It can
be shown that the results are general and apply to three dimensions. This approach is

734 — CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
similar to that used for analyzing the optics of one-dimensional periodic media, as set
forth in Sec. 7.2 and discussed in Appendix C. The traveling-wave eigenfunctions are
Bloch modes with the periodicity of the crystal lattice [see (7.2-4)].
Figure 17.1-2 (a) Crystal-lattice
(а) eee ^\ [\ [\ [\ [\ [\ a ee. potential associated with an infinite
a one-dimensional collection of atoms
— ная with lattice constant a. (6) Idealized
(bd) eee | | Vo | | | | | | | | | | | | eee rectangular-barrier potential (height
Vo) for the Kronig—Penney model.
Electrons and Holes
As is understood from Sec. 14.1, the wavefunctions of the electrons in a semiconductor
overlap so that the Pauli exclusion principle applies. This principle dictates that no
two electrons may occupy the same quantum state and that the lowest available en-
ergy levels fill first. Elemental semiconductors, such as Si and Ge, have four valence
electrons per atom that form covalent bonds. At 7’ = 0° К, the number of quantum
states that can be accommodated in the valence band is such that it is completely filled
while the conduction band is completely empty. The material cannot conduct electricity
under these conditions.

As the temperature increases, however, some electrons can be thermally excited
from the valence band into the empty conduction band, where unoccupied states are
abundant (Fig. 17.1-3). These electrons can then act as mobile carriers, drifting through
the crystal lattice under the effect of an applied electric field, and thereby contributing
to the electric current. Moreover, an electron departing from the valence band leaves
behind an unoccupied quantum state, which in turn allows the remaining electrons in
the valence band to exchange places with each other under the influence of an external
field. The collection of electrons remaining in the valence band thus undergoes motion.
This can equivalently be regarded as motion, in the opposite direction, of the hole left
behind by the departed electron. The hole therefore behaves as a particle with positive
charge +e.

eeeseesesecseses isceeese: ]
Е
Seeseesseees HK eceseece Conduction
RECO hand
ise СЯ an
Mig cosercceseces 20000000 cee
mt eat et Se eeeteet ® _
5 Electron” Bandgap Figure 17.1-3 Electrons in the con-
о . .
= Hole energy Eg duction band and holes in the valence
В Ай band at Г > 0° К.
3 | WES" SoS "SS eSee tate Seek
ea] + + I + + + I tah +++ I + + hed + +4
O00 900000000000000000000
‚+ + +4 +4+4$4+4+4+++4+4+++++++1 Valence
р+4+4+$4+++4$+4$++4+++4++++++++++1
Leto oo ooo oo oo 4444444444 rave
(an dip dn dh dh dn dn Gnd dh nanan anda anand ah anda anna
+4+4+44+4++4+4+4+4+4++++4+4++++++1
©000000000000000000000000

The net result is that each electron excitation creates а free electron in the con-
duction band and a free hole in the valence band. The two charge carriers are free
to drift under the effect of the applied electric field and thereby to generate an electric
current. The material behaves as a semiconductor whose conductivity increases sharply
with increasing temperature, as an increasing number of mobile carriers are thermally
generated.

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 735

Energy—Momentum Relations

In accordance with Schrédinger wave mechanics, the energy E and momentum p of

an electron in a region of constant potential, such as free space, are related by Е =

р? /2mo = h?k? /2mo, where р is the magnitude of the momentum, k is the magnitude

of the wavevector К = p/h, and mp is the electron mass (9.1 x 10-31 kg). The E-k

relation for a free electron is thus a simple parabola.

НИ

EXERCISE 17.1-1

Епегду-Мотепшт Relation for а Free Electron.

(a) Consider a one-dimensional version of the time-independent Schrédinger equation set forth in
(14.1-3) for a free electron (М = 0) of mass mo. Use a trial solution of the form w(x) «
exp(—jkx) to show that the energy-momentum relation assumes the quadratic form

hk?
Е— (17.1-1)
2то
so that the electron energy is not quantized in this example.

(b) The free photon, in contrast, has the linear energy-momentum relation provided in (13.1-11),

Е = pc = chk, (17.1-2)

where cis the speed of light in the medium. What is the origin and significance of this distinction?
ee
The motion of an electron in a semiconductor material is similarly governed by
the Schrédinger equation, but with a potential generated by the charges in the pe-
riodic crystal lattice of the material. As discussed earlier, this construct results in
allowed energy bands separated by forbidden bands, as exemplified by the Kronig—

Penney model. The ensuing E-k relations for electrons and holes, in the conduction

and valence bands respectively, are illustrated in Fig. 17.1-4 for Si and GaAs. The

energy Е is a periodic function of the components (k1, Ко, Кз) of the wavevector К,

with periodicities (л /a 1, 7/a2,7/ag3), where ал, а2, аз are the crystal lattice constants.

Figure 17.1-4 displays cross sections of this relation along two particular directions of

the wavevector К. The range of К values in the interval [-л/а, п/а] defines the first

Brillouin zone. The energy of an electron in the conduction band thus depends not only

on the magnitude of its momentum, but also on the direction in which it is traveling in

the crystal. The semiconductor E—k diagram bears some resemblance to the photonic-

crystal w-K diagram (Fig. 7.3-5).

E E
jesessscesscssousecsccese iecnesesccnesssesnnsssss
XIII NINA II Я с хх ea
[рае Ед 142 су

a | ‚ | |

Si Ш [100] GaAs п [100]
Figure 17.1-4 Cross sections of the E—k relations for Si and GaAs along two crystal directions:
[111] toward the left and [100] toward the right.

736 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
Effective Mass
It is apparent from Fig. 17.1-4 that near the bottom of the conduction band, for both Si
and GaAs, the E-k relation may be approximated by a parabola

h?k?

E=E,.+——, (17.1-3)

2MNe
where Ес is the energy at the bottom of the conduction band and К is measured
from the value of the wavevector where the minimum occurs. This parabolic relation
suggests that a conduction-band electron behaves in a manner analogous to that of a
free electron, but with a mass m,, known аз the conduction-band effective mass or the
electron effective mass, in place of the free-electron mass mp. The effective mass m,
embodies the influence of the ions of the lattice on the motion of a conduction-band
electron. This behavior is highlighted in Fig. 17.1-5.

Similarly, near the top of the valence band, we may write
hk?
E=E,-——, (17.1-4)

2mMy
where Е, = Ес — Е, is the energy at the top of the valence band and ть, is the
valence-band effective mass or the hole effective mass, as illustrated in Fig. 17.1-5.
The influence of the lattice ions on the motion of a valence-band hole is captured by
its effective mass m,. The effective mass also depends on the particular band under
consideration. Indeed, several parabolas of different curvature often coexist near the
top of the valence band, corresponding to so-called heavy holes, light holes, and split-
off-band holes.

Е Е
FXEXAXALALAT ATLL ALIA ITNT a Е НЕЕ. ses
Е Е
Е 1 еУ Fy=142eV
+ ++44+4++4+4++++4+4++4+++4+++++1] + +44+++4++4+4++++4+4++4++++++++1
+ ++44+4++4+4+4++++4+4++4+4++4+++++1] + +44+4++4++4++4+4+4+4++4+++++++1
+ ++44+++4+4+4+++++4++4+44++4+++++1] + +44+++4++4++4+++++4++++++++1
+ ++++++4$+++4++++4+4++++++++1 + +++44+4++4+++4+$+++++++++++++1
назаааанннннн нанаааааннннн
92032 00002202200000000200 92092 20020000200020000200
$1 GaAs

Figure 17.1-5 The E-k relation is well-approximated by parabolas at the bottom of the conduction
band and at the top of the valence band, for both Si and GaAs.

The effective mass depends on the crystal structure of the material and on the
direction of travel with respect to the lattice since the interatomic spacing varies with
crystallographic direction. Typical averaged effective masses, normalized to the free-
electron mass mo, are provided in Table 17.1-1 for Si, GaAs, and GaN.

Table 17.1-1 Typical averaged values of the normalized electron
and hole effective masses in selected semiconductor materials.
mMe/ то My / то
$1 0.98 0.49
GaAs 0.07 0.50
GaN 0.20 0.80

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 737
Direct- and Indirect-Bandgap Semiconductors
Semiconductors for which the conduction-band minimum energy and the valence-
band maximum energy correspond to the same value of the wavenumber k (same
momentum) are called direct-bandgap materials. Semiconductors for which this is
not the case are known as indirect-bandgap materials. As is evident from Fig. 17.1-5,
GaAs is a direct-bandgap semiconductor whereas Si is an indirect-bandgap semicon-
ductor. The distinction is important because a transition between the bottom of the
conduction band and the top of the valence band in an indirect-bandgap semiconductor
must accommodate a substantial change in the momentum of the electron, requiring
the participation of a third body such as a phonon. As a consequence, under ordinary
circumstances indirect-bandgap semiconductors such as Si cannot serve as efficient
light emitters whereas direct-bandgap semiconductors such as GaAs can, as will be
elucidated subsequently.
B. Semiconductor Materials
Figure 17.1-6 reproduces the section of the periodic table that comprises the ele-
ments important in semiconductor electronics and photonics. Both elemental and
compound semiconductors play crucial roles in these technologies. We discuss sev-
eral classes of these materials in turn and then consider doped semiconductors.
IL ш м у М
5 Figure 17.1-6 Section of the periodic
ВС table relating to semiconductors. Each col-
3 umn designation should, strictly speaking,
Ма [АР $ have “А” appended to it, so that II represents
4 ПА, ete. The full periodic table is displayed
70] [Са |Ge}|As}|Se in Fig. 14.1-3. Elements indicated in blue,
5 LJ cas yellow, and silver take the form of gases,
Cd) | In }|Snj|Sb}|Te [] Liquid liquids, and solids, respectively, at room
6 82 temperature.
Hel № Solid
Elemental Silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge) are important elemental
Semiconductors semiconductors in group IV of the periodic table. Both find
widespread use in photonics, although they have traditionally
not been used as light emitters because of their indirect
bandgaps (their basic properties are provided in Table 17.1-2).
However, Ge has been shown to behave as a direct-bandgap
material and to emit light under special circumstances. Silicon
is used for fabricating virtually all commercial electronic inte-
grated circuits and serves a wide variety of functions in pho-
tonics under the rubric silicon photonics. Group-IV elements
can be alloyed to form compound semiconductors with a broad
array of uses. For example, the indirect-bandgap, binary alloy
silicon carbide (SiC), also known as carborundum, is useful
for fabricating ultraviolet photodetectors and as a template
for I1I-nitride photon emitters. Silicon-germanium (Si,Ge,_,)
finds application in both photonics and electronics, including
use as an infrared photodetector material. Germanium-tin
(Ge;_,Sn,) is suitable for fabricating photodetectors, as well
as laser diodes and LEDs. Useful ternary and quaternary
group-IV semiconductor compounds include Si,Ge;_z—ySny
and Si,Ge;_z-y—,Sny,C,, respectively. The use of alloys and
combinations of group-I[V elements is an emerging area of
photonics that has come to be called group-IV photonics.

738 — CHAPTER17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
Binary Ш-У Compounds formed by combining an element in column III,
Semiconductors such as aluminum (Al), gallium (Ga), or indium (In), with an
element in column V, such as nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P),
arsenic (As), or antimony (Sb), are important semiconductors
in photonics. These twelve Ш-У compounds are listed in
Table 17.1-2, along with their crystal structure (zincblende or
wurtzite), bandgap type (direct or indirect), bandgap energy
E,, and bandgap wavelength Л, = hc,/E, (the free-space
wavelength of a photon of energy E,). The bandgap energies
and lattice constants of these compounds are also displayed
(№) in Fig. 17.1-7. Photon sources (light-emitting diodes and
@) 1 © lasers) and photodetectors can be readily fabricated from
SS many of these binary compounds. The first of the binary
OSS semiconductors to find use in photonics was gallium arsenide
г (GaAs), which is also sometimes used аз an alternative to Si
for fast electronic devices and circuits. Gallium nitride (GaN)
plays а central role in photonics by virtue of its near-ultraviolet
bandgap wavelength; it is also important in electronics because
of its ability to withstand high temperatures. AIN, an insulator
by virtue of its large bandgap energy, emits photons in the
vicinity of A, = 210 nm in the mid ultraviolet.
Zincblende and Table 17.1-2 Selected elemental and binary Ш-У semiconductors
Diamond along with their crystal structures, bandgap types, bandgap energies, and
bandgap wavelengths.
са _ < |p > Crystal Bandgap Bandgap Bandgap
=e к Зиисшге“ Туре? Епегоус Wavelength?
cy 3 Material (D/Z/W) (/D) E, (eV) Ay (ит)
\ va Гу И С
ребра Si D I 1.12 Lu
les a Ge D I 0.66 1.88
AIN WwW D 6.02 0.206
Wurtzite AIP Z I 2.45 0.506
AlAs 7 I 2.16 0.574
© Ga, а <, АБ Z I 1.58 0.785
°м ТУ бам W D 3.39 0.366
rh GaP 7 I 2.26 0.549
| GaAs Z D 1.42 0.873
р СИА GaSb Z D 0.73 1.70
И InN \ р 0.65 1.91
| . InP Z D 1.35 0.919
| | InAs 7 D 0.36 3.44
> b InSb Z D 0.17 7.29
*The crystal structure listed above indicates the most commonly used form of the material: р = Diamond,
Z = Zincblende, W = Wurtzite. The zincblende structure comprises two interpenetrating face-centered-cubic
lattices, one for each element, displaced from each other by 1/4 of the body diagonal. The diamond lattice is the
same as zincblende except that all atoms are identical. The Brillouin zone for these structures is illustrated in
Fig. 7.3-4. The wurtzite structure consists of two hexagonal close-packed lattices, one for each element, displaced
from each other along the three-fold c axis by 3/s of its length. All atoms are tetrahedrally bonded with their
neighbors.
Ы = Indirect bandgap; D = Direct bandgap. ‘°At T = 300° К.
"The bandgap wavelength Лу is related to the bandgap energy Eg by Ag = hco/E,; when the bandgap energy is
expressed in eV and the bandgap wavelength is expressed in jum, this relation can be expressed as Ag = 1.24/E,.

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 739
Ternary Ш-У Compounds formed from two elements of column IIT with
Semiconductors one element from column V (or one from column III with
two from column V) are important ternary semiconductors.
Al,,Ga,_,As, for example, is a compound with properties that
interpolate between those of AlAs and GaAs, depending on
(al) the compositional mixing ratio x (the fraction of Ga atoms
x in GaAs that are replaced by Al atoms). The bandgap energy
or E, for this material varies between 1.42 eV for GaAs and
© ©) 2:16 eV for AlAs, as т varies between 0 and 1 along the line
connecting GaAs and AlAs in Fig. 17.1-7(a). Because this
line is essentially vertical, Al,,Ga,_,As is lattice matched to
® GaAs; a layer of arbitrary composition of this material can
“ therefore be grown оп a layer of different composition without
lax straining the lattice. Other useful Ш-У ternary compounds,
Ga) (№) such as GaAs;_,P,, are also represented in the bandgap-
energy versus lattice-constant diagram displayed in Fig. 17.1-
7(a). In;Ga,_,As is widely used for photon sources and
detectors in the near-infrared region of the spectrum. Similarly,
Al,Ga;_,N and In,Ga;_,N are important ternary semicon-
ductors for photonic devices that operate in the ultraviolet,
violet, blue, and green regions of the spectrum, as can be
deduced from Fig. 17.1-7(6). In the domain of electronics,
In,Ga,_,As/InP heterojunction bipolar transistors can both

emit light and be switched at high speeds.
Quaternary Ш-У These compounds are formed by mixing two elements from
Semiconductors column Ш with two elements from column У (or three
from column Ш with one from column У). Quaternary
semiconductors offer more flexibility for fabricating materials
with desired properties than do ternary semiconductors by
© virtue of their additional degree of freedom. An example
у is provided Бу Inj_,Ga,As;_,P,, whose bandgap energy
Go varies between 0.36 eV (InAs) and 2.26 eV (GaP) as the
Ga) compositional mixing ratios x and y vary between 0 and 1. The
x lattice constant usually varies linearly with the mixing ratio
1-х (Vegard’s law). The stippled area in Fig. 17.1-7(a) indicates
Cn) the range of bandgap energies and lattice constants spanned
by this compound. For mixing ratios x and y that satisfy y =
2.16(1 — a), In;_,Ga,As)_,P, can be lattice matched to InP,
which can therefore serve as a convenient template (substrate).
This quaternary compound is used for fabricating light-
emitting diodes, laser diodes, and photodetectors, particularly
in the vicinity of the 1550-nm optical fiber communications
wavelength (Chapters 18, 19, and 25). Another example is
provided by Al,In,Ga,_,—yP, for which GaAs serves as a
template; this compound offers high-brightness emission in
the red, orange, and yellow spectral regions [shaded region in
Fig. 17.1-7(a)]. Yet another important quaternary material is
the III-nitride compound Al,,In,Ga;_;,N, which serves the
green, blue, violet, and ultraviolet spectral regions in the same
way [Fig. 17.1-7(b)]. Convenient templates for the I[J—nitrides

are sapphire, SiC, and Si.

740 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
257 $s-AP_ 0.5 в[. Ам 0.2
x т AlAs
29 А №. 9 5
5 as оз > $4 °3 2
uP 15 GaAs i =, uP con s
5 ! 05 Be sic 042
Е: ® Si ! $ 53 ° Е
=. 10 123 3. 058
z . GaSb 5 2 2 06 &
я бе \ 208 « Е
0.5 30 ; 108
WN InSb. InN 2.0
о 10 , 10
54 56 58 60 62 64 66 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Lattice constant (A) Lattice constant (A)
(a) (b)
Figure 17.1-7 Dots represent bandgap energies, bandgap wavelengths, and lattice constants for
Si, Ge, SiC, and 12 binary Ш-У compounds. Solid and dashed curves represent direct-bandgap and
indirect-bandgap compositions, respectively. A material may have a direct bandgap for one mixing
ratio and an indirect bandgap for a different mixing ratio. Ternary materials are represented along
the line that joins two binary compounds. A quaternary compound is represented by the area formed
by its binary components. (a) In;_,GazAs)_,P, is represented by the stippled area with vertices at
InP, InAs, GaAs, and GaP, while (Al, Ga_,.),Inj_,,P is represented by the shaded area with vertices
at AIP, InP, and GaP. Both are important quaternary compounds, the former in the near infrared and
the latter in the visible. Al,,Ga;_,As is represented by points along the line connecting GaAs and
AlAs. As x varies from 0 to 1, the point moves along the line from GaAs and AIAs. Since this line
is nearly vertical, Al,Ga,_,As is lattice matched to GaAs. (b) Though the II]-nitride compound
In, Ga;_,.N can, in principle, be compositionally tuned to accommodate the entire visible spectrum,
this material becomes increasingly difficult to grow as the In composition becomes appreciable.
In,Ga;_,N is principally used in the green, blue, and violet spectral regions, while Al,,Ga,_,N
and Al, In,Ga,_z—,N serve the ultraviolet region. All compositions of these Ш-пй4е compounds
are direct-bandgap semiconductors.
Binary and Binary II-VI materials, i.e., compounds formed from elements
Ternary II-VI in column II (e.g., Zn, Cd, Hg) and chalcogenide elements in
Semiconductors column VI (e.g., S, Se, Te) of the periodic table are also useful
semiconductors. This family includes ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe, CdS,
CdSe, CdTe, HgS, HgSe, and HgTe, as displayed in Fig. 17.1-
8. Unlike the Ш-У alloys, the П-УТ compounds are widely
found in nature. All of these materials have a zincblende
structure and are direct-bandgap semiconductors, with the
exception of HgSe and HgTe, which are semimetals with
small negative bandgaps. A particular merit of ZnSe is that
it can be deposited on a GaAs substrate with a relatively low
defect density since the lattice constants of the two materials
are similar. The ternary II-VI semiconductor Hg,,Cd,_,Te
can be grown without strain on a CdTe substrate since HgTe
and CdTe are nearly lattice matched. This material system is
widely used for photodetectors, as are other I-VI compounds
(Chapter 19). However, photon sources fabricated from these
materials are rarely used since they suffer from limited life-
times. Notwithstanding, binary I-VI semiconductor materials
such as CdSe are readily fashioned into quantum dots with
tunable photoluminescence emission wavelengths (see, e.g.,
Fig. 14.1-13).

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 741
ZnS
35
3.0 У. а _ Figure 17.1-8 Bandgap energies, bandgap
> 25 ZnSe ов ие os Е wavelengths, and lattice constants for various
© \ > II-VI semiconductors (HgSe and HgTe are
Ч 20 м % = semimetals with small negative bandgaps).
5 15 \ case Co” 5 HgTe and CdTe are nearly lattice matched,
a м 5 10 8 as evidenced by the vertical line connect-
2 10 \ \ 12 ©. ing them, so that the ternary semiconductor
Е: \ \ 20 2 Hg,Cd,_,Te can be grown without strain
05 м \ Е оп а СаТе template. It is ап important mid-
00 \ \ 10 infrared photodetector material.
HgSe HgTe’
54 56 58 60 62 64 66
Lattice constant (A)
Ternary IV-VI Ternary IV-VI compounds such as Pb,Sn;_,Te and
Semiconductors Pb,Sn;_,Se have also been used as laser diodes and infrared
photodetectors. As photodetectors, however, these alloys have
long RC response times because of their large relative
permittivities. Moreover, cycling between room and cryogenic
temperatures can also be problematic because of their high
thermal-expansion coefficients.
Doped Semiconductors
The electrical and optical properties of semiconductors can be modified substantially
by the controlled introduction into the material of small amounts of specially chosen
impurities called dopants. The introduction of these impurities can alter the concen-
tration of mobile charge carriers by many orders of magnitude. Dopants with excess
valence electrons, called donors, replacing a small proportion of the normal atoms in
the crystal lattice, create a predominance of mobile electrons. The material is then said
to be an n-type semiconductor. Thus, atoms from column V (e.g., P or As) replacing
a fraction of the column-IV atoms in an elemental semiconductor (e.g., Si or Ge), or
atoms from column VI (e.g., Se or Te) replacing a small fraction of the column-V
atoms in a Ш-У binary semiconductor (e.g., As or Sb), produce an n-type material.
Similarly, a p-type semiconductor is made by using dopants with a deficiency of
valence electrons, called acceptors. The result is then a predominance of mobile holes.
Column IV atoms in an elemental semiconductor replaced with a small proportion of
column-III atoms (e.g., В or In), or column-III atoms in a Ш-У binary semiconductor
replaced with a small proportion of column-II atoms (e.g., Zn or Cd), yield p-type
material. Column-IV atoms act as donors for column Ш and as acceptors for column
V, and therefore can be used to produce an excess of both electrons and holes in
Ш-У materials. Of course, the charge neutrality of the material is not altered by the
introduction of dopants.
Semiconductors can also be doped with impurities that have the same valence as
a constituent of the crystal lattice. Rather than introducing excess carriers, such sub-
stitutional doping can create a material that acts as a solid-state laser medium. For
example, a transition-ion-doped zinc-chalcogenide laser can be formed by introducing
Cr?+ ions into ZnS to substitute for a fraction of the Zn?+ ions comprising the lattice
(Sec. 16.3A).
Undoped semiconductors (i.e., semiconductors devoid of intentional doping) are
referred to as intrinsic materials, whereas doped semiconductors are called extrinsic
materials. The concentrations of mobile electrons and holes are equal in an intrinsic

742 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS

semiconductor, п = р = nj;, where the intrinsic concentration п; grows with in-
creasing temperature at an exponential rate. On the other hand, the concentration of
mobile electrons in an n-type semiconductor (majority carriers) is far greater than
the concentration of holes (minority carriers), 1.е., п >> р. The opposite is true in
a p-type semiconductor, where holes are the majority carriers, and р >> п. A doped
semiconductor at room temperature typically has a majority-carrier concentration that
is approximately equal to the doping concentration.

As semiconductor devices shrink in scale, their characteristics are determined by
ever smaller numbers of dopant atoms that are randomly distributed in position. At the
nanoscale, the average number of dopants shrinks to a handful. However, techniques
such as single-ion implantation can be used to fabricate semiconductor materials in
which the number of dopant atoms, and their positions, are precisely determined,
thereby offering improved control over device behavior. Nowadays, semiconductor
materials such as Si and Ge can be grown with sufficient purity that a nanodevice
can be totally devoid of impurities, thereby permitting a solitary dopant to be inserted
at a specified position.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 17.1-1. Donor-Electron lonization Energy. Consider a germanium crystal of
relative permittivity €/€, = 16 (Table 17.2-1) doped with arsenic donor atoms. The electron effective
mass т = 0.2 mg, where то is the free electron mass. The donor electron moves in the field of the
singly charged arsenic ion (As*), and has energy levels similar to those of an electron in the hydrogen
atom. Choosing п = Тапа Z = 1 in (14.1-4), and replacing ео Бу с, and M,. by те, to accommodate
the polarization density and crystal lattice of the semiconductor material, respectively, the energy of
the donor electron is given by

1%} m-e*

Ep =-— (=) aE (17.1-5)
Since the energy of the electron in the ground state of hydrogen is = —13.6 eV with respect to the
vacuum level (1.е., it is 13.6 eV below the ionization energy), the energy of the arsenic donor electron
is Ер = —(m_/mo)(€o/€)? X 13.6 eV = —0.01 eV. The donor electron thus resides in the forbidden
band, at a level = 0.01 eV below the conduction band edge. Since the thermal energy КТ = 0.026
eV at T = 300° K, however, essentially all of the donors are ionized at room temperature and the
donor electrons are elevated to the conduction band. The material thus has a conduction-band donor
concentration that matches the impurity concentration.
ПИ
Organic Semiconductors
Organic semiconductors are increasingly employed in electronics and photonics, where
they are used in the form of photovoltaic devices, light-emitting diodes, and high-
quality organic light-emitting displays. Though they generally do not offer the speed
of inorganic semiconductor structures, they can be inexpensively fabricated in the
form of thin sheets, making low-cost, mechanically flexible optoelectronic components
available. These materials can be engineered to suit specific requirements and can
sometimes be printed on a suitable substrate, such as plastic, using inkjet technology.

Organic semiconductors are available in two principal varieties, as illustrated
schematically in Fig. 17.1-9:

1. Small organic molecules such as pentacene, which consists of five linearly joined

benzene rings [Fig. 17.1-9(a)].

2. Conjugated polymer chains such as polyacetylene, comprising hundreds or thou-

sands of carbon atoms [Fig. 17.1-9(6}].
A hallmark of these amorphous materials, termed conjugation, is their alternating
single and double carbon-carbon bonds. Though the double-bond electrons shown in
Figs. 17.1-9(a) and (6) are portrayed as belonging to particular atoms, these electrons

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 743

-— Electron

© — Sodium ion
Figure 17.1-9 Organic semiconductors are available in two principal varieties: (a) small organic
molecules such аз pentacene, and (6) conjugated polymer chains such as polyacetylene. (с) Doping
polyacetylene with sodium donors yields an n-type material, whereas doping with iodine acceptors
yields a p-type material. Each vertex represents a carbon atom and each line represents a bond
between two carbon atoms; double lines represent double bonds. Hydrogen bonds are omitted for
simplicity. A wide variety of organic molecules and polymers are used in photonics and electronics.
are actually delocalized and shared among multiple atoms, or along a segment of poly-
mer comprising roughly ten repeat units. The molecule, or polymer segment, behaves
as a single system in which the allowed electron states form bands.

In its undoped state, the valence band of a conjugated polymer chain is typically
full, and its conduction band empty, so that it behaves as an insulator. However, as
illustrated in Fig. 17.1-9(c), dopants such as sodium and iodine act as donors and
acceptors, respectively, providing n-type and p-type variants. Small organic molecules
are often conductive in their pure state.

A number of fundamental features distinguish organic semiconductors from their
inorganic cousins:

= The constituent molecules are bound by weak van der Waals forces (bond energy

= 0.01 eV) whereas the atoms in inorganic semiconductors are bound by strong
covalent bonds (bond energy = 3 eV).

и Weak intermolecular bonds offer mechanical flexibility whereas inorganic semi-

conductors are rigid.
= The energy bands derive from localized behavior at the molecular level whereas
in inorganic semiconductors they derive from the collection of atoms as a whole.

= The two energy levels that play key roles are the highest occupied molecular
orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), whereas
in inorganic semiconductors the conduction and valence bands are of paramount
importance.

= Charge carriers have high effective mass (m./mo = 500) and low mobility (д =

10-3 cm?/V-s) whereas carriers in inorganic semiconductors have low effective
mass (т. /то < 1) and high mobility (wu = 103 cm?/V:s).

= Intermolecular electronic transfer occurs via phonon-assisted tunneling (hopping)

whereas electronic transport in inorganic semiconductors is characterized by drift
and diffusion.

= Organic semiconductors generally exhibit low electrical conductivity and are sen-

sitive to moisture whereas the reverse is true for inorganic semiconductors.

Graphene and 2D Materials

As indicated at the beginning of this section, the semiconductor elements residing in
group-IV of the periodic table are of substantial interest in photonics. Most important
among these are carbon (C), silicon (Si), germanium (Ge), and tin (Sn). Group-IV
elements exist in various structural forms, known as allotropes, that have different
properties and applications. Among the most widely known allotropes of carbon, for
example, are diamond, graphite, carbon nanotubes, carbon dots, and graphene (there
are others). Graphene, a material with a one-atom-thick carbon honeycomb lattice, has
come to the fore in recent years because of its unique properties and because it can
be fashioned into various photonic devices. Elemental group-IV analogs of graphene
include silicene, germanene, and stanene. These hexagonal-lattice 2D atomic sheets
are often denoted h-C, h-Si, h-Ge, and h-Sn, respectively, where the designation ‘h’
represents ‘hexagonal.’ The nascent fields of graphene photonics and 2D-material
photonics lie under the rubric of group-IV photonics.

744 — СНАРТЕВ 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS

Graphene. Graphene is a 2D material comprising a single 0.33-nm-thick layer of
graphite with atoms arranged in a hexagonal honeycomb structure (Fig. 17.1-10).
Graphene is endowed with a collection of exceptional properties that make it useful in
many photonics applications:

= It is an excellent conductor of electricity and has an optical transmittance near

unity so it can be used as a transparent electrode. Its optical absorbance is nearly
constant at A = ле? /йс = 2.3% over a broad wavelength band that stretches
from 0.7 to 25 jum; its reflectance is a negligible R = 1.3 x 10“; and its
transmittance at normal incidence is J = 97.7%. Moreover, its current-carrying
capacity is substantial (== 108 A/cm? on $105).

= It is a semimetal with zero bandgap that can interact with radiation over a broad

spectral range stretching from the THz to the ultraviolet. Its absorption coefficient
a & 7 x 10° cm”! is an order of magnitude greater than that of Si or GaAs. It is
readily doped, so that its electronic properties can be altered.

= It has an unusually high electron mobility. When deposited оп $105, its mobility is

= 1.5 x 104 cm?/V‘-s so that the drift velocity of carriers is an order of magnitude
greater than that in Si, as indicated in (19.1-9). It therefore has an inordinately
fast response and is suitable for use in ultrafast photodetectors. Its high area-to-
volume ratio makes it highly effective for applications involving sensing.

= It is chemically stable, refractory to high temperatures, and resilient in high hu-

midity. It has high thermal conductivity and excellent mechanical strength, yet is
elastic and therefore bendable.

= It exhibits fast and strong absorption saturation, rendering it suitable for use as a

saturable absorber for mode-locked lasers and as a broadband modulator.
|
У
5777272 >
Graphene \
Figure 17.1-10 Graphene, also referred to as h-C, is a single layer of carbon atoms arranged
in a hexagonal honeycomb lattice. Its Е-К diagram is conical rather than parabolic (compare with
Fig. 17.1-5). Graphene behaves as a semimetal with zero bandgap since its conduction- and valence-
band cones meet at points that define the Fermi level Ех.

Because of its particular 2D symmetry, the band structure for carriers in graphene
takes the form of cones (Fig. 17.1-10), rather than the parabolas that are character-
istic of traditional semiconductors (Fig. 17.1-5). The E—k diagram is therefore lin-
ear rather than parabolic; it is similar to that for photons and is characterized by
(17.1-2) rather than by (17.1-1). As with photons, the electronic excitations (called
Dirac fermions) behave as if they were massless; this leads to an unusually large
Fermi velocity, и я c/300, that underlies graphene’s fast response. Furthermore, the
conduction- and valence-band cones meet at single points (called Dirac points) that
define the Fermi level, so that graphene behaves as a semimetal with zero bandgap.
Several other 2D materials also host massless Dirac fermions and behave as semimetals
(e.g., silicene, germanene, stanene, and 2В1>-Богорвепе), but most 2D materials have
approximately parabolic, rather than conical, band structures. Though Dirac fermions
have been most widely studied in 2D materials, they are also hosted by 3D materials
such as compressively strained a-Sn (gray tin) and Na3Bi.

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 745

Though the interaction of light with graphene is strong on a per-unit-distance ba-
sis (a = 7 x 10° сш"), devices that rely on single-pass operation encounter an
insignificant thickness of material (0.33 nm). Building an effective 2D-based device
thus generally requires that the interaction be enhanced, which may be achieved by
specialized doping or siting, by coupling to a photonic waveguide or cavity, or by cou-
pling to plasmons, phonons, or excitons. Significant enhancement of the light—matter
interaction can be attained by making use of traveling surface plasmon polaritons.
Other 2D materials. By virtue of its semimetallic nature, graphene is a poor emitter
of light. However, a number of other 2D materials, including various transition-metal
dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as molybdenum disulfide, behave as direct-bandgap
semiconductors with bandgap energies Е, that lie between 0.5 and 3 eV. As with
3D semiconductors, the bandgap energy can be tuned via chemistry, composition,
and/or quantum confinement. These materials can serve as light emitters or reflectors
dominated by excitonic transitions.

Single-layer TMDs such as MoSg and WSez consist of a sublayer of transition metal
sandwiched between two sublayers of chalcogen. МоЗо, for example, has an overall
layer thickness of 0.65 nm and a bandgap energy of 1.8 eV. In their 3D configurations,
some of these materials (e.g., graphite, MoS2) serve as industrial lubricants. This
is because consecutive atomic layers are bound only by weak van der Waals forces
and easily slide over each other, a property that has made it relatively easy to peel
off individual 2D layers. Indeed, such 2D materials are often called van der Waals
materials. Other 3D precursors (e.g., silicon, germanium) form tight bonds in all three
dimensions so that their 2D versions, when extracted, tend to buckle. The number of
possible TMDs that can be formed is substantial since there are tens of transition metals
and, as is apparent in column VIA of the periodic table (Fig. 14.1-3), at least three
chalcogens (S, Se, and Te; the elements O, Po, and Lv are sometimes also included in
this category). Some single-layer materials behave as insulators (e.g., hexagonal BN,
with Е, = 6 eV) and others behave as metals (e.g., TiS2). 2D materials can be used
in isolation, or combined in layers of various compositions, to create atomically thin
heterostructures that serve as planar photonic devices.

C. Carrier Concentrations
Determining the concentration of carriers (electrons and holes) as a function of energy
requires knowledge of two features that we consider in turn:

= The density of allowed energy levels (density of states)

= The probability that each of these levels is occupied
Density of States
The quantum state of an electron in a semiconductor material is characterized by its
energy E, its wavevector k [the magnitude of which is approximately related to E by
(17.1-3) or (17.1-4)], and its spin. The state is described by a wavefunction that satisfies
certain boundary conditions.

An electron near the conduction band edge may be approximately described as a
particle of mass m, confined to a three-dimensional cubic box (of dimension d) with
perfectly reflecting walls, i.e., a three-dimensional infinite rectangular potential well.
The standing-wave solutions require that the components of the vector k = (kz, ky, kz)
assume the discrete values К = (qim/d, qo7/d, q3m/d), where the respective mode
numbers (41, 42, 43) аге positive integers. This result is a three-dimensional gener-
alization of the one-dimensional infinite square well (Exercise 17.1-5). The tip of
the vector k must lie on the points of a lattice whose cubic unit cell has dimension
п/4. There are therefore (d/7)° points per unit volume in k-space. The number of
states whose vectors k have magnitudes between 0 and k is determined by counting

746 — СНАРТЕВ 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
the number of points lying within the positive octant of a sphere of radius К [with
volume = (3)47k3/3 = 7k?/6]. Because of the two possible values of the electron
spin, each point in k-space corresponds to two states. There are therefore approxi-
mately 2(7k?/6) /(a/d)> = (k?/3n?)d® such points in the volume d? and (k?/37?)
points per unit volume. It follows that the number of states with electron wavenumbers
between А and К + Ak, per unit volume, is o(k)Ak = [(d/dk)(k?/3n?)|Ak =
(Е? /л2) ДК, so that the density of states is

k2

о(К) = —. (17.1-6)

п Density of States

This derivation is identical to that used for counting the number of modes that can be
supported in a three-dimensional electromagnetic resonator (Sec. 11.3C). In the case
of electromagnetic modes there are two degrees of freedom associated with the field
polarization (i.e., two photon spin values), whereas in the semiconductor case there
are two spin values associated with the electron state. In resonator optics the allowed
electromagnetic solutions for k were converted into allowed frequencies via the linear
frequency—wavenumber relation и = ck/2z7. In semiconductor physics, on the other
hand, the allowed solutions for k are converted into allowed energies via the quadratic
energy—wavenumber relations given in (17.1-3) and (17.1-4).

If ос(Е) AE represents the number of conduction-band energy levels (per unit vol-
ume) lying between Е and E + AE, then, because of the one-to-one correspondence
between Е and А governed by (17.1-3), the densities ос(Е) and o(k) must be related by
0c(E) dE = o(k) dk. Thus, the density of allowed energies in the conduction band is
oc(E) = o(k)/(dE/dk). Similarly, the density of allowed energies in the valence band
15 0,(E) = o(k)/(dE/dk), where Е is given by (17.1-4). The approximate quadratic
E-k relations (17.1-3) and (17.1-4), which are valid near the edges of the conduction
band and valence band, respectively, are used to evaluate the derivative dE /dk for each
band. The result that obtains is

3/2
o-(E) = Cine МЕ-Е., EDE. (17.1-7)
3/2
o(E) = CM) ИЕ СЕ, E<E,. (17.1-8)
212 Density of States
Near Band Edges
The square-root relation is a result of the quadratic energy-wavenumber formulas for
electrons and holes near the band edges. The dependence of the density of states
on energy is illustrated in Fig. 17.1-11(c). It is zero at the band edge, and increases
away from it at a rate that depends on the effective masses of the electrons and holes.
The values of тт. and m, provided in Table 17.1-1 are averaged values suitable for
calculating the density of states.
Probability of Occupancy
In the absence of thermal excitation (at T = 0° К), all electrons occupy the lowest
possible energy levels, subject to the Pauli exclusion principle. The valence band is then
completely filled (there are no holes) and the conduction band is completely empty (it
contains no electrons). When the temperature is raised, thermal excitations raise some
electrons from the valence band to the conduction band, leaving behind empty states in
the valence band (holes). The laws of statistical mechanics dictate that under conditions
of thermal equilibrium at temperature T’, the probability that a given state of energy Е
is occupied by an electron is determined by the Fermi function

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 747
E
Q je) Е
‘I fi Е (Е)
Е. а co --- Egor Eg
ai г Ta o,(E)
а ~<—
ILI tii tittitiiiiiit ,
Density of states
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 17.1-11 (а) Cross section of the E—k diagram (e.g., in the direction of the А! component,
with kz and Кз fixed). (b) Allowed energy levels (at all К). (с) Density of states near the edges of the
conduction and valence bands. The quantity 9.(E) dE is the number of quantum states with energy
between Е and E+dE, per unit volume, in the conduction band. The quantity о, (Е) has an analogous
interpretation for the valence band.
КЕ) = : (17.1-9)
= —_____.—__,, .1-
ехр [(Е — Ey)/kT] +1 Fermi Function
where К is Boltzmann’s constant (at T’ = 300° К, КТ = 0.026 eV) and Е} is a constant
known as the Fermi energy or Fermi level. This function, plotted in Fig. 17.1-12, is
also known as the Fermi-Dirac distribution. Each energy level E is either occupied
[with probability f(E)], or empty [with probability 1 — f(E)]. The probabilities f(E)
and 1 — f(E) depend on the energy Е in accordance with (17.1-9). The function f(E)
is not itself a probability distribution, and it does not integrate to unity; rather, it is a
sequence of occupation probabilities for successive energy levels.
НБРНЕБЕВЕРЕРЕБЕВЕЕЕРНЕЕЫ ЕА T>0°K Eh T=0°K
Ne eet eta ©
Е, bete® ‘oe ооо тво. a E. Е,
Fp р Ey \ | Е,
к | Е,
©92052020202225020205050 |
ЕЕНЕЕНЕНЫЫ ort he tae
Figure 17.1-12 The Fermi function f(E) is the probability that an energy level Е is filled with an
electron; 1 — f(E) is the probability that it is empty. In the valence band, 1 — f(E) is the probability
that energy level E is occupied by a hole. At T = 0° К, f(E) = 1 for < Ey, and f(E) = 0 for
Е > Е;; there are then no electrons in the conduction band and no holes in the valence band.
Because }(Е;) = 1/2, whatever the temperature T, the Fermi level is that energy
for which the probability of occupancy (if there were an allowed state there) would be
1/2. The Fermi function is a monotonically decreasing function of Е. At T = 0° К,
f(E) is О for E > Е; and 1 for < Е;. This establishes the significance of Ey; it is
the division between the occupied and unoccupied energy levels at JT’ = 0° К. Since
(Е) is the probability that the energy level E is occupied, 1 — f(E) is the probability

748 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
that it is empty, i.e., that it is occupied by a hole if E lies in the valence band. Thus, for
energy level E:
f(E) = probability of occupancy by an electron
1 — f(E) = probability of occupancy by a hole (valence band).

When E—Ey >> kT, f(E) = exp[—(E—Ey)/kT], so that the high-energy tail of the
Fermi function in the conduction band decreases exponentially with increasing energy.
The Fermi function is then proportional to the Boltzmann distribution, which describes
the exponential energy dependence of the fraction of a population of atoms excited to
a given energy level (Sec. 14.2). By symmetry, when Е < Е; and Е; — Е > КТ,
1— f(E) = exp|—(Ey — Е)/КТ]; the probability of occupancy by holes in the valence
band then decreases exponentially as the energy decreases well below the Fermi level.
Thermal-Equilibrium Carrier Concentrations
Let n(E) AE and p(E) AE be the number of electrons and holes per unit volume,
respectively, with energy lying between Е and Е + AE. The densities n(E) and
p(E) can be obtained by multiplying the densities of states at energy level E by the
probabilities of occupancy of the level by electrons or holes, so that

n(E) = o(E)f(E), P(E) = о (ВИ — КЕ). (17.1-10)
The concentrations (populations per unit volume) of electrons and holes, n and p, are
then obtained from the integrals
(oe) Ey
n= | n(E) dE, p= | p(E) dE. (17.1-11)
Ес —со

In an intrinsic (pure) semiconductor at any temperature, п = р because thermal
excitations always create electrons and holes in pairs. The Fermi level must therefore
be placed at an energy value such that n = р. In materials for which m, = те, the
functions n(E) and p(E) are also symmetric, so that Е; must lie precisely in the middle
of the bandgap (Fig. 17.1-13). In most intrinsic semiconductors, the Fermi level does
indeed lie near the middle of the bandgap.

Е--------------=--- Е,
ево С
БЕЕЕЕЕНЫНЫЕ +2 ВЕВЪБВЕНЫЫ те
Figure 17.1-13 The concentrations of electrons and holes, п(Е) and p(E), аз a function of energy
E, for an intrinsic semiconductor. The total concentrations of electrons and holes are n and p,
respectively.

The energy-band diagrams, Fermi functions, and equilibrium concentrations of
electrons and holes for n-type and p-type doped semiconductors are illustrated in
Figs. 17.1-14 and 17.1-15, respectively. Donor electrons occupy an energy Ep slightly
below the conduction-band edge so that they are easily raised to it. If Ер = 0.01 eV,
for example, at room temperature (КТ = 0.026 eV) most donor electrons will be
thermally excited into the conduction band (Example 17.1-1). As a result, the Fermi

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 749
level [the energy at which f(E;) = 1/2] will lie above the middle of the bandgap. For
a p-type semiconductor, the acceptor energy level lies at an energy Ед just above the
valence-band edge so that the Fermi level will lie below the middle of the bandgap.
Our attention has been directed to the mobile carriers in doped semiconductors. These
materials are, of course, electrically neutral, as assured by the fixed donor and acceptor
ions, so that n + М = p+ Np, where Ny and Np are, respectively, the number of
ionized acceptors and donors per unit volume.

Sey я Е Е
ея Е
T Donor level Е; n(E)
Е |
ee Е,
й
НЕВаННННННННЯ
жи 0 1 КЕ) Carrier concentration
Figure 17.1-14 Energy-band diagram, Fermi function f(E), and concentrations of mobile
electrons and holes, n(E) and p(E), respectively, in an n-type semiconductor.
Recsessesessesecsececencs
secceccscosocccccccccsccs
ЕЕ Е
ооо кож 00099 Е, n(E)
E Acceptor level E _
eee esogsecensescss® 008 9 |
segeesoosoooesess soccese
999 020220232220502005050
©0000 000000000000000000
0 1 КЕ) — Carrier concentration
Figure 17.1-15 Епегоу-Бап@ diagram, Fermi function f(E), and concentrations of mobile
electrons and holes, n(E) and p(E), respectively, in a p-type semiconductor.
ee
EXERCISE 17.1-2
Exponential Approximation of the Fermi Function. When Е — Е; > КТ, the Fermi
function f(E) may be approximated by an exponential function. Similarly, when Е; — E >> kT,
1 — f(E) may be approximated by an exponential function. These conditions apply when the Fermi
level lies within the bandgap, but away from its edges by an energy of at least several times kT (at
room temperature kT’ ~ 0.026 eV whereas Е, = 1.12 eV in Si and 1.42 eV in GaAs). Using these
approximations, which apply for both intrinsic and doped semiconductors, show that (17.1-11) gives
E.-E
= N.exp{ —-—2 —! 17.1-12
‚мов В) ве
E,—E,
= М, exp( -—— 17.1-13
р xo кт ) ( )
E,
пр = N,N, exp Er}? (17.1-14)
where №, = 2(27m,kT/h?)3/? and М, = 2(27m,kT/h?)°/?. Verify that if Ey is closer to the
conduction band and m, = те, then п > р, whereas if it is closer to the valence band, then p > п.
ee

750 — CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
Law of Mass Action
Equation (17.1-14) reveals that, in thermal equilibrium, the product
QnkT \* 5 E
np = 4({ ——— } (mem,)° exp{ ——£ 17.1-15
is independent of the location of the Fermi level Е; within the bandgap and the semi-
conductor doping level, provided that the exponential approximation to the Fermi
function is valid. The constancy of the concentration product is called the law of mass
action. For an intrinsic semiconductor, п = р = n;. Combining this latter relation
with (17.1-14) then leads to
/ Е
2 Intrinsic
Carrier Concentration
revealing that the intrinsic concentration of electrons and holes increases with temper-
ature Т` at an exponential rate. The law of mass action may therefore be written in the
form
np = n?. (17.1-17)
Law of Mass Action

The values of п; for different materials vary because of differences in the bandgap
energies and effective masses. The room-temperature intrinsic carrier concentrations
for Si, GaAs, and GaN are provided in Table 17.1-3.

Table 17.1-3 Intrinsic carrier concentrations at T = 300° K.*

Material п; (сСт-3)

$1 1.5 x 100

GaAs 1.8 x 106

GaN 1.9 x 10-10

“Substitution of the values of йе and my, provided in Table 17.1-1, and the value

for E, given in Table 17.1-2, into (17.1-16), does not yield the listed values of nj

because of the sensitivity of the formula to the precise values of the parameters.
The law of mass action is useful for determining the concentrations of electrons and
holes in doped semiconductors. A moderately doped n-type material, for example, has
a concentration of electrons n that is essentially equal to the donor concentration Np.
Using the law of mass action, the hole concentration is then p = n?/Np. Knowledge
of n and p allows the Fermi level to be determined via (17.1-11). As long as the
Fermi level lies within the bandgap, at an energy greater than several times kT from its
edges, the approximate relations in (17.1-12) and (17.1-13) can be used to determine it
directly.

If the Fermi level lies inside the conduction (or valence) band, the material is re-
ferred to as a degenerate semiconductor. In that case, the exponential approximation
of the Fermi function cannot be used, so that np = n?. The carrier concentrations
must then be obtained by numerical solution. Under conditions of very heavy doping,
the donor (acceptor) impurity band actually merges with the conduction (valence) band
to become what is known as the band tail. This results in an effective decrease of the
bandgap.

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 751
Quasi-Equilibrium Carrier Concentrations
The occupancy probabilities and carrier concentrations considered above are applica-
ble only for a semiconductor in thermal equilibrium. They are not valid when thermal
equilibrium is disturbed. There are, nevertheless, situations in which the conduction-
band electrons are in thermal equilibrium among themselves, as are the valence-band
holes, but the electrons and holes are not in mutual thermal equilibrium. This can occur,
for example, when an external electric current or photon flux induces band-to-band
transitions at too high a rate for interband equilibrium to be achieved. This situation,
which is known as quasi-equilibrium, arises when the relaxation (decay) times for
transitions within each of the bands are much shorter than the relaxation time between
the two bands. Typically, the intraband relaxation time < 10-1? s, whereas the radiative
electron-hole recombination time == 10-9 s.

Under these circumstances, it is appropriate to use a separate Fermi function for
each band; the two associated Fermi levels, denoted Ey, and Ерь, are known as quasi-
Fermi levels (Fig. 17.1-16). When Ey, and Ey, lie well inside the conduction and
valence bands, respectively, the concentration of both electrons and holes can be quite
large.

ЕСА “ . .
EXE eee yecsesscs|
и
Peo te а cet Е.А в
Е, ИР \. Е
Eg
+ +, › 00000000000 000 900 © Л
© Фо000Ф 00000000. OS 000 |
©0000000000000000 0000000 |
©222020005022222020505000 |
$900000000555030000000900 |
0 1 fe) 0 1 7(Е) Carrier
concentration
Figure 17.1-16 А semiconductor in quasi-equilibrium. The probability that a particular
conduction-band energy level E is occupied by an electron is f.(E), a Fermi function with Fermi
level Ey,. The probability that a valence-band energy level Е is occupied by a hole is 1 — f,(E),
where f,,(E) is a Fermi function with Fermi level Е». The concentrations of electrons and holes are
n(E) and p(E), respectively. Both can be large.
НИ
EXERCISE 17.1-3
Determination of the Quasi-Fermi Levels Given the Electron and Hole Concentrations.
(a) Given the concentrations of electrons n and holes p in a semiconductor at T = 0° K, use (17.1-
10) and (17.1-11) to show that the quasi-Fermi levels are
2\2/3 п? 2/3
Ere = Ес + (3 =— 17.1-18
ус = Ес + (31°) om,” ( a)
2)2/3 i? 2/3
Е» = Е, - (3 —— р?/3. 17.1-18b
у И.Р ( )
(b) Show that these equations are approximately applicable for an arbitrary temperature ТГ п and р
are sufficiently large so that Ex, — Ес >> kT and Е, — Ey, > КТ, 1.е., if the quasi-Fermi levels
lie deep within the conduction and valence bands.
ee

752 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
D. Generation, Recombination, and Injection
Generation and Recombination in Thermal Equilibrium
The thermal excitation of electrons from the valence band into the conduction band
results in the electron-hole generation (Fig. 17.1-17). Thermal equilibrium requires
that this generation process be accompanied by a simultaneous reverse process of de-
excitation. This process, called electron-hole recombination, occurs when an electron
decays from the conduction band to fill a hole in the valence band (Fig. 17.1-17). The
energy released by the electron may take the form of an emitted photon, in which case
the process is called radiative recombination.
Generation Recombination Figure 17.1 “17 Electron-hole generation
and recombination.
aa Se 2х Serer ete ers:
SOS eoscesossosoooosesess
pip hnhannnannananaaana
adn dada ha nnnnnannananaaana
adda hhh ha mnnnnanaananaaanea
++++4++4+++++++4+++++++++++1
|©998090905555025850090558
Nonradiative recombination can occur via a number of independent competing
processes, including the transfer of energy to lattice vibrations (creating one or more
phonons) or to another free electron via Auger recombination (which, as a three-
particle interaction, can take place when the carrier density is very high). Recombi-
nation may also take place at surfaces and indirectly via traps or defect centers, which
are energy levels associated with impurities or defects associated with grain bound-
aries, dislocations, or other lattice imperfections that lie within the forbidden band. An
impurity or defect state can act as a recombination center if it is capable of trapping
both an electron and a hole, thereby increasing their probability of recombining (Fig.
17.1-18). Impurity-assisted recombination may be radiative or nonradiative.
FXXXAXLEAL LANL AAL ANGINA AY]
а:
sees ОнОна
eee ое si те |
и
=e © see see ee | 6: | 6 se)
Figure 17.1-18 Electron—hole recombina-
Trap Auger : . tos ПИ
tion via а trap; via Auger recombination.
Е пя аа Л
ее
999. 989000000000000000000
Pind ba bnnnnnnnannnneoeeee
Наннананааани
+ ++++4++4+++4+4++4+44++++4++++1
ВЕННЕБЕЕБЫНЫЗВЕБЫЫНЫВЫНЫЫ
Because it takes both an electron and а hole for а recombination to occur, the rate
of recombination is proportional to the product of the concentration of electrons and
holes, i.e.,
rate of recombination = rnp, (17.1-19)
where the recombination coefficient + (cm?/s) depends on the characteristics of the
material, including its composition and defect density, and on temperature; it also
depends relatively weakly on the doping level.

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 753

The equilibrium concentrations of electrons and holes по and po are established
when the generation and recombination rates are in balance. In the steady state, the
rate of recombination must equal the rate of generation. If Go is the rate of thermal
electron-hole generation at a given temperature, then, in thermal equilibrium,

Со = кпоро- (17.1-20)
The product of the electron and hole concentrations поро = Go/r is approximately
the same whether the material is n-type, p-type, or intrinsic. Thus, п? = Go/r, which
leads directly to the law of mass action поро = n?. This law is therefore seen to
be a consequence of the balance between generation and recombination in thermal
equilibrium.
Electron—Hole Injection
A semiconductor in thermal equilibrium with carrier concentrations по and ро has
equal rates of generation and recombination, бо = гпоро. Now let additional
electron—hole pairs be generated at a steady rate К (pairs per unit volume per unit
time) by means of an external (nonthermal) injection mechanism, such as light falling
on the material. A new steady state will be reached in which the concentrations are
п = 10+ Ап and p = pp + Ap. It is clear, however, that An = Ap since the electrons
and holes are created in pairs. Equating the new rates of generation and recombination,
we obtain
Go t+ А = гпр. (17.1-21)
Substituting Со = кпоро into (17.1-21) leads to
R=r(np—nopg) = г (noAn + роАл + An’) = rAn(no+ppt+An), (17.1-22)
which we write in the form
An
R=—, (17.1-23)
T
with
1 (17.1-24)
т= а. .1-
r[(no + ро) + Ап]
For an injection rate such that An < по + po,
1
т. (17.1-25)
x(no + ро) Excess-Carrier
Recombination Lifetime
In an n-type material, where по >> po, the recombination lifetime т я 1/rno is
inversely proportional to the electron concentration. Similarly, for a p-type material
where ро >> no, we obtain т = 1/rpg. This simple formulation is not applicable
when traps play an important role in the process.

The parameter т may be regarded as the electron-hole recombination lifetime of
the injected excess electron-hole pairs. This is readily understood by noting that the
injected-carrier concentration is governed by the rate equation

d(An An
(Ат) _ pp An (17.1-26)
dt T

754 = CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
which is similar to (15.2-3). In the steady state, d/An)/dt = 0 whereupon (17.1-23),
which is like (15.2-13), is recovered. If the source of injection is suddenly removed
(К becomes 0) at the time tg, then An decays exponentially with time constant т, 1.е.,
An(t) = An(to) exp[—(t — to)/7]. In the presence of strong injection, on the other
hand, 7 is itself a function of An, as evident from (17.1-24), so that the rate equation
is nonlinear and the decay is no longer exponential.
If the injection rate R is known, the steady-state injected concentration may be
determined from
permitting the total concentrations п = по + An and p = pg + An to be determined.
Furthermore, if quasi-equilibrium is assumed, (17.1-11) may be used to determine the
quasi-Fermi levels. Quasi-equilibrium is not inconsistent with the balance of gener-
ation and recombination assumed in the analysis above; it simply requires that the
intraband equilibrium time be short in comparison with the recombination time т.
This type of analysis will prove useful in developing theories of the semiconductor
light-emitting diode and the semiconductor laser diode, which are based on enhancing
light emission by means of carrier injection, as will become clear in Chapter 18.
И
EXERCISE 17.1-4
Electron—Hole Pair Injection in GaAs. Assume that electron-hole pairs are injected into n-
type GaAs (Е, = 1.42 eV, т. = 0.07 mo, ть, = 0.50 то) at a rate К = 1023 /cm3-s. The thermal
equilibrium concentration of electrons is по = 10'°/cm*. If the recombination coefficient к =
10-™ cm?/s and T = 300° К, determine:
(a) The equilibrium concentration of holes ро.
(b) The steady-state excess concentration An.
(с) The recombination lifetime т.
(d) The separation between the quasi-Fermi levels Ey. — Езь, assuming that Т = 0° К.
ee
Internal Quantum Efficiency
The internal quantum efficiency 77; of a semiconductor material is defined as the
ratio of the radiative electron-hole recombination coefficient to the total (radiative
and nonradiative) recombination coefficient. This parameter is important because it
determines the efficiency of light generation in a semiconductor material. The total
rate of recombination is given by (17.1-19). If the recombination coefficient r is split
into a sum of radiative and nonradiative parts, r = г, + Yrpr, the internal quantum
efficiency is
r r
“= — = ———. (17.1-28)
г г; + Cnr
The internal quantum efficiency may also be written in terms of the recombination
lifetimes since т is inversely proportional to г [see (17.1-25)]. Defining the radiative
and nonradiative lifetimes т; and Tn, respectively, leads to
1 1 1
-=-+—. (17.1-29)
т Tr Тот

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 755
The internal quantum efficiency is then r,/r = (1/7,)/(1/r), or
T т,
Ем. (17.1-30)
Tr Tr + Tar Internal
Quantum Efficiency

The radiative recombination lifetime 7, governs the rate of photon absorption and
emission, as explained in Sec. 17.2C. Its value depends on the carrier concentrations
and the material parameter r,. For low to moderate injection rates,

1
тя, (17.1-31)
к; (по + ро)
in accordance with (17.1-25). The nonradiative recombination lifetime is governed by а
similar equation. However, if nonradiative recombination takes place via defect centers
in the forbidden band, ть, is more sensitive to the concentration of these centers than
to the electron and hole concentrations.

Typical values for recombination coefficients and lifetimes are listed in Table 17.1-
4. Order-of-magnitude values are given for the radiative recombination coefficients
ry; the radiative, nonradiative, and overall recombination lifetimes, т., тг, and т,
respectively; and the internal quantum efficiencies 7;.

Table 17.1-4 Representative values for radiative recombination coefficients r,, recombination
lifetimes, and internal quantum efficiencies 7;, for representative semiconductors.®

Material ry (cm3/s) Tr Tar T 7
Si 10-45 10 ms 100 ns 100 ns 10-5
GaAs 10-6 100 ns 100 ns 50 ns 0.5
GaN? 10-8 20 ns 0.1 ns 0.1 ns 0.005
* Assuming n-type material with a carrier concentration по = 1017 / cm® and defect centers with a concentration
1015 /em?, at T = 300° К.

> As a matter of practice, InGaN is used; this increases the internal quantum efficiency to 7; 0.3.

The radiative lifetime for bulk Si is orders of magnitude longer than its overall
lifetime, principally because of its indirect bandgap. This results in a small internal
quantum efficiency. For GaAs and GaN, on the other hand, the decay is largely via
radiative transitions (these materials have a direct bandgap), and consequently the
internal quantum efficiency is large. Direct-bandgap materials are therefore useful
for fabricating light-emitting structures that operate via interband spontaneous and
stimulated emission, whereas indirect-bandgap materials generally are not.

Light emission from indirect-bandgap materials can, nevertheless, be achieved by
making use of interactions such as stimulated Raman scattering and intersubband
transitions (Sec. 18.1D), which do not rely on the interband transitions discussed in
Sec. 17.2B.

E. Junctions

Juxtapositions of differently doped regions of a single semiconductor material are
called homojunctions. An important example is the p—n junction, which is discussed
in this section. Junctions between different semiconductor materials are called hetero-
junctions. These are discussed subsequently.

756 — CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS

The р-п Junction

The p—n junction is a homojunction between a p-type and an n-type semiconductor. It
acts as a diode, which can serve in electronics as a rectifier, logic gate, voltage regulator
(Zener diode), or tuner (varactor diode); and in photonics as a light-emitting diode
(LED), laser diode (LD), photodetector, or solar cell.

A рп junction consists of a p-type and an n-type section of the same semicon-
ductor materials in metallurgical contact. The p-type region has an abundance of holes
(majority carriers) and few mobile electrons (minority carriers); the n-type region has
an abundance of mobile electrons and few holes (Fig. 17.1-19). Both charge carriers
are in continuous random thermal motion in all directions.

a

Jl
5 ee Е, Figure 17.1-19 Energy levels and
Е Е catrier concentrations for a p-type and
В ЕКА ап n-type semiconductor before contact.
А n

58 ЫЪмьт

Es

5 8 ОНИ © ОНИ О И

5 Position

When the two regions are brought into contact (Fig. 17.1-20), the following se-
quence of events takes place:

= Electrons and holes diffuse from areas of high concentration toward areas of low

concentration. Thus, electrons diffuse from the n-region into the p-region, leaving
behind positively charged ionized donor atoms. In the p-region the electrons re-
combine with the abundant holes. Similarly, holes diffuse from the p-region into
the n-region, leaving behind negatively charged ionized acceptor atoms. In the
n-region the holes recombine with the abundant mobile electrons. This diffusion
process does not continue indefinitely, however, because it causes a disruption of
the charge balance in the two regions.

= As aresult, a narrow region on both sides of the junction becomes nearly depleted

of mobile charge carriers. This region is called the depletion layer. It contains
only the fixed charges (positive ions on the n-side and negative ions on the p-
side). The thickness of the depletion layer in each region is inversely proportional
to the concentration of dopants in the region.

= The fixed charges create an electric field in the depletion layer that points from the

n-side toward the p-side of the junction. This built-in field obstructs the diffusion
of further mobile carriers through the junction region.

= An equilibrium condition is established that results in a net built-in potential dif-

ference Vo between the two sides of the depletion layer, with the n-side exhibiting
a higher potential than the p-side.

= The built-in potential provides a lower potential energy for an electron on the n-

side relative to the p-side. As a result, the energy bands bend, as illustrated in

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 757
Fig. 17.1-20. In thermal equilibrium there is only a single Fermi function for the
entire structure so that the Fermi levels in the p- and n-regions must align.
= No net current flows across the junction. The currents associated with diffusion
and built-in field (drift current) cancel for both the electrons and holes.
ее |
——— Electric field
Figure 17.1-20 A рп junction in
thermal equilibrium at ТГ > 0° К. The
5 depletion-layer, energy-band diagram,
|: and concentrations (on а logarithmic
= АЕ, scale) of mobile electrons n(x) and
5 eVo holes p(a) are shown as functions of
2 the position x. The built-in potential
a difference Vo corresponds to an energy
eVo, where е is the magnitude of the
Е p(x) 16) electron charge.
HS
8 x
The Biased p—n Junction
An externally applied potential will alter the potential difference between the p- and n-
regions. This in turn will modify the flow of majority carriers, so that the junction can
be used as a “gate.” If the junction is forward biased by applying a positive voltage
V to the p-region (Fig. 17.1-21), its potential is increased with respect to the n-region,
so that an electric field is produced in a direction opposite to that of the built-in field.
The presence of the external bias voltage causes a departure from equilibrium and a
misalignment of the Fermi levels in the p- and n-regions, as well as in the depletion
layer. The presence of two Fermi levels in the depletion layer, F, and Ey,,, represents
a state of quasi-equilibrium.
+ Ло
2
5 ити = : .
| Ее fe Figure 17.1-21 Energy-band diagram
° v t+ —; . .
8 te(Vo-V) and carrier concentrations for a forward-
д biased p—n junction.
Е p(x) n(x)
4 8 Excess 1 < ль Excess
ER] electrons Ато” УССР Во
°
о x

758 — CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS

The net effect of the forward bias is to reduce the height of the potential-energy hill
by an amount eV. The majority carrier current turns out to increase by an exponential
factor exp(eV/kT) so that the net current becomes i = i, exp(eV/kT) — is, where 1,
is a constant. The excess majority carrier holes and electrons that enter the n- and р-
regions, respectively, become minority carriers and recombine with the local majority
carriers. Their concentration therefore decreases with distance from the junction as
shown in Fig. 17.1-21. This process is known as minority carrier injection.

If the junction is reverse biased by applying a negative voltage V to the p-region,
the height of the potential-energy hill is augmented by eV. This impedes the flow of
majority carriers. The corresponding current is multiplied by the exponential factor
exp(eV/kT), where У is negative; i.e., it is reduced. The net result for the current is
i =1,exp(eV/kT) — 1, so that a small current of magnitude = i, flows in the reverse
direction when |V| >> АТ/е.

A рп junction therefore acts as a diode with a current-voltage (7-V ) characteristic

ti=ts lexw (==) — i ; (17.1-32)
kT Ideal Diode
Characteristic
as illustrated in Fig. 17.1-22. The ideal diode characteristic in (17.1-32) is known as
the Shockley equation.
i
+ +
0
- - 0 у
(а) (Б) (с)
Figure 17.1-22 (а) Voltage and current in a p—n junction. (6) Circuit representation of the p—n
junction diode. (c) Current—voltage characteristic of the ideal p—n junction diode.

The response of a p—n junction to a dynamic (AC) applied voltage is determined
by solving the set of differential equations governing the processes of electron and
hole diffusion, drift (under the influence of the built-in and external electric fields),
and recombination. These effects are important for determining the speed at which
the diode can be operated. They may be conveniently modeled by two capacitances,
a junction capacitance and diffusion capacitance, in parallel with an ideal diode. The
junction capacitance accounts for the time necessary to change the fixed positive and
negative charges stored in the depletion layer when the applied voltage changes. The
thickness [ of the depletion layer turns out to be proportional to /Vo — У ; it therefore
increases under reverse-bias conditions (negative У) and decreases under forward-bias
conditions (positive У). The junction capacitance С' = €A/I (where A is the area of the
junction) is therefore inversely proportional to ./Vo — У . The junction capacitance of
a reverse-biased diode is smaller (and the RC response time is therefore shorter) than
that of a forward-biased diode. The dependence of C' on У is used to make voltage-
variable capacitors (varactors).

Minority carrier injection in a forward-biased diode is described by the diffusion
capacitance, which depends on the minority carrier lifetime and the operating current.

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 759
The p-i-n Junction Diode
A p-i-n (PIN) junction diode is made by inserting a layer of intrinsic (or lightly
doped) semiconductor material between a p-type region and an n-type region (Fig.
17.1-23). Because the depletion layer extends into each side of a junction by a dis-
tance inversely proportional to the doping concentration, the depletion layer of the р—
junction penetrates deeply into the z-region. Similarly, the depletion layer of the 7—n
junction extends well into the i-region. As a result, the p—7—n diode can behave like a
p—n junction with a depletion layer that encompasses the entire intrinsic region. The
electron energy, density of fixed charges, and the electric field in a p~7—n junction
diode in thermal equilibrium are illustrated in Fig. 17.1-23. One advantage of using a
diode with a large depletion layer is its small junction capacitance and its consequent
fast response. For this reason, p—i—n diodes are often favored over p—n diodes for use
as semiconductor photodetectors. The large depletion layer also permits an increased
fraction of the incident light to be captured, thereby increasing the photodetection
efficiency (Sec. 19.3B).
Depletion layer
i a A
x
+ т
a
<_—_
Electric field
Figure 17.1-23 Electron energy,
Electron Е fixed-charge density, and electric field
energy с magnitude for а p—i—n junction diode in
Е thermal equilibrium.
Fixed-ch
1xed-charge
density |- | х
Electric- и \ ,
field magnitude x
F. Heterojunctions
Junctions between different semiconductor materials are known as heterojunctions.
Optical sources and detectors make extensive use of heterojunctions in their designs;
they are used not only as active regions but also as contact layers and waveguid-
ing regions. The electron affinities of the materials determine the alignments of the
conduction- and valence-band edges. It is often advantageous to lattice match the semi-
conductor materials and to make use of graded junctions rather than abrupt ones. The
juxtaposition of different semiconductors can have manifold advantages in photonics:
= Junctions between materials of different bandgap create localized jumps in the
energy-band diagram, as portrayed in Fig. 17.1-24. A potential-energy disconti-
nuity provides a barrier that can be useful in preventing selected charge carriers
from entering regions where they are undesired. This property may be used in a
p—n junction, for example, to reduce the proportion of current carried by minority
carriers, and thus to increase injection efficiency.

760 — СНАРТЕВ 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
ZL) Наше 17.1-24 The р-р-п double heterojunc-
tion structure. The middle layer is of narrower
п bandgap than the outer layers. In equilibrium,
the Fermi levels align so that the edge of the
conduction band drops sharply at the p—p junction
and the edge of the valence band drops sharply at
zs fo | the р—п junction. The conduction- and valence-
5 OO band discontinuities are known as band offsets.
5 Eg Е. _____ Fg; When the device is forward biased, these jumps
3) | iz | act as barriers that confine the injected minority
aa Г | carriers to the region of lower bandgap. Elec-
trons injected from the n-region, for example,
are prevented from diffusing beyond the barrier
at the р-р junction. Similarly, holes injected
>. о м _ from the p-region are not permitted to diffuse
г beyond the energy barrier at the p—n junction.
5 This double-heterostructure configuration there-
Е | —— — —— —————————— Е, | fore forces electrons and holes to occupy a narrow
3 common region. This substantially increases the
a efficiency of light-emitting diodes, semiconductor
optical amplifiers, and laser diodes, as discussed in
Chapter 18.
= Discontinuities in the energy-band diagram created by two heterojunctions can
be useful for confining charge carriers to a desired region of space. For exam-
ple, a layer of narrow-bandgap material can be sandwiched between two lay-
ers of a wider bandgap material, as shown in the p—p—n structure illustrated in
Fig. 17.1-24 (which consists of a p—p heterojunction and a p—n heterojunction).
This double-heterostructure (DH) configuration is used effectively in the fabri-
cation of LEDs, semiconductor optical amplifiers, and laser diodes, as explained
in Chapter 18.
= Heterojunctions are useful for creating energy-band discontinuities that accelerate
carriers at specific locations. The additional kinetic energy suddenly imparted to a
carrier can be useful for selectively enhancing the probability of impact ionization
in a multilayer avalanche photodiode (Sec. 19.4B).
= Semiconductors of different bandgap type (direct and indirect) can be used in the
same device to select regions of the structure where light is emitted. Semiconduc-
tors of the direct-bandgap type emit light efficiently (Sec. 17.2B).
= Semiconductors of different bandgaps can be used in the same device to select
regions of the structure where light is absorbed. A semiconductor material whose
bandgap energy is larger than the photon energy of light incident on it will be
transparent, acting as a window layer.
= Heterojunctions of materials with different refractive indices can be used to create
photonic structures and optical waveguides that confine and direct photons, as
discussed in Chapters 7 and 9.
G. Quantum-Confined Structures
Heterostructures of thin layers of semiconductor materials can be grown epitaxially,
1.е., as layers of one semiconductor material over another, by using techniques such
as molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE); liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE); and vapor-phase epi-
taxy (VPE), of which common variants are metalorganic chemical vapor deposition
(MOCVD) and hydride vapor-phase epitaxy (HVPE). Homoepitaxy is the growth of

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 761
materials that have the same composition as the substrate whereas heteroepitaxy is the
growth of materials on a substrate of different composition, whether lattice-matched or
not. MBE makes use of molecular beams of the constituent elements that are caused
to impinge on an appropriately prepared substrate in a high-vacuum environment, LPE
uses the cooling of a saturated solution containing the constituents in contact with
the substrate, and VPE uses gases in a reactor. The compositions and dopings of
the individual layers, which can be made as thin as monolayers, are determined by
manipulating the arrival rates of the molecules and the temperature of the substrate
surface.

When the layer thickness is comparable to, or smaller than, the de Broglie wave-
length of a thermalized electron, the quantized energy of an electron resident in the
layer must be accommodated, in which case the energy-momentum relation for a
bulk semiconductor material is no longer applicable. The de Broglie wavelength is
expressed as Лав = h/‘p, where № is Planck’s constant and р is the electron momen-
tum (Agz_* 50 nm for GaAs). Three structures offer substantial advantages for use
in photonics: quantum wells, quantum wires, and quantum dots (Sec. 14.1D). The
appropriate energy-momentum relations for these structures are derived below. The
use of quantum-confined structures in photonic devices is considered in Chapters 18
and 19.

Quantum Wells

A quantum-well structure, displayed in Fig. 17.1-25, is a double heterostructure con-
sisting of an ultrathin (< 50 nm) layer of semiconductor material whose bandgap is
smaller than that of the surrounding material. An example is provided by a thin layer
of GaAs surrounded by AlGaAs (Fig. 14.1-12). The sandwich forms 1D conduction-
and valence-band rectangular potential wells within which electrons and holes are
confined: electrons in the conduction-band well and holes in the valence-band well.

= d—>|
E
9 ‘ ESS ‘Bulk
2 `, vo 2
т р Е ede aa
I : В
< 4 Eg Eg
x LY ae И Bulk
о АГА
У = О“
я ;
(а) (b) (c)
Figure 17.1-25 (a) Geometry of the quantum-well structure. (b) Energy-level diagram for
electrons and holes in a quantum well. (с) Cross section of the E-k relation in the direction of kz
or Кз. The energy subbands are labeled by their quantum number q; = 1, 2,.... The Е-К relation for
bulk semiconductor is indicated by the dashed curves.

A sufficiently deep potential well can be approximated as an infinite rectangular
potential well (Fig. 17.1-26). The energy levels E, of a particle of mass т (те for
electrons and m, for holes) confined to a one-dimensional infinite rectangular well

762 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
of full width d are determined by solving the time-independent Schrodinger equation
(14.1-3). As shown in Exercise 17.1-5, the energy levels turn out to be
h? (ап /d)?
g, = Maley а=1,2,3,.... (17.1-33)
As ап example, the first three allowed energy levels of an electron in an infinitely deep
GaAs well (те = 0.07 то) of width а = 10 nm are E, = 54, 216, and 486 meV,
respectively (recall that kT’ = 26 meV at Т = 300° К). The smaller the width of the
well, the larger the separation between adjacent energy levels.
ee
EXERCISE 17.1-5
Energy Levels of a Quantum Well. Solve the Schrédinger equation (14.1-3) to determine the
allowed energies of an electron of mass 7% ш an infinitely deep one-dimensional rectangular potential
well [V(x) = 0 for 0 < x < dand V(x) = со otherwise], confirming that E, = h?(qr/d)?/2m,
q=1,2,3,... , as illustrated in Fig. 17.1-26(a). Compare these energies with those for the particular
finite square quantum well shown in Fig. 17.1-26(5).
12 |
E, = 78.9——
4 md?
Continuum
a
Е, = 44.4"
та i
2.0 —,;
32.0 md?
Vo
ia
he m
md Pe
11.9—, Е, = 0.37 М
12 та 2 2 0
E\- 49 р 32, E,=0.10 Vp
0 d 0 d
(a) (5)
Figure 17.1-26 Energy levels of (a) a one-dimensional infinite rectangular potential well, and
(b) a finite square quantum well with an energy depth Мо = 32h?/md 2.
ee
However, semiconductor quantum wells are actually three-dimensional constructs.
In the quantum-well structure shown in Fig. 17.1-25, electrons (and holes) are confined
in the x direction to within a distance 41 (the well thickness), but they extend over
much larger dimensions (d2, d3 >> d) in the plane of the confining layer. Thus, in the
y—z plane, they behave as if they were in bulk semiconductor.
The electron energy—momentum relation is
nek? 2
Е=Е, + — + + —3, (17.1-34)
2Me 2Me 2Me

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 763
where ky = q7/d1, ko = 421/45, Кз = ggm/d3, and 41, 42, 4з = 1,2,3,.... Since
41 < 45, d3, the parameter К1 takes on well-separated discrete values, whereas kz
and k3 have finely spaced discrete values that may be approximated as a continuum. It
follows that the energy-momentum relation for electrons in the conduction band of a
quantum well is given by

h2 12
Е=Е +Еап + =—, qm =1,2,3,..., (17.1-35)
2Me
where К is the magnitude of a two-dimensional К = (k2, k3) vector in the y—z plane.
Each quantum number 41 corresponds to a subband whose lowest energy is Ес + Eq.
Similar relations apply for the valence band.

The energy-momentum relation for a bulk semiconductor is given by (17.1-3),
where К is the magnitude of a three-dimensional vector К = (kj, kz, k3). The key
distinction is that for the quantum well, /, takes on well-separated, discrete values. As
a result, the density of states associated with a quantum-well structure differs from that
associated with bulk material, for which the density of states is determined from the
magnitude of the three-dimensional vector with components ky = qa/d, kg = 427 /d,
and Аз = q3m/d for 41 = 45 = аз = а. The result is o(k) = К? /л? per unit volume
[see (17.1-6)], which yields the density of conduction-band states [see (17.1-7) and
Fig. 17.1-11]

3/2
о, (Е) = vem VE-E., E>0. (17.1-36)

In a quantum-well structure the density of states is obtained from the magnitude of
the two-dimensional vector (k2, Кз). For each quantum number 41 the density of states
is therefore о(К) = k/z states per unit area in the y—z plane, and therefore k}/md
per unit volume. The densities ос(Е) and о(К) are related by 0.(E) dE = o(k) dk =
(k/md,) dk. Finally, using the E—k relation (17.1-35) we obtain dE/dk = h?k/me,
from which

ESE. + Ей
0«(Е) = < Та Ч = 1,2,3,....  (17.1-37)
0, Е<Е-+ Eq,

Thus, for each quantum number 41, the density of states per unit volume is constant
when Е > Ес + E41. The overall density of states is the sum of the densities for
all values of q,, so that it exhibits the staircase distribution shown in Fig. 17.1-27.
Each step of the staircase corresponds to a different quantum number 41 and may be
regarded as a subband within the conduction band (Fig. 17.1-25). The bottoms of these
subbands move progressively higher for higher quantum numbers. It can be shown by
substituting Е = Ес + Ед in (17.1-36), and by using (17.1-33), that atF = Ес + Eq
the quantum-well density of states is the same as that for the bulk material. The density
of states in the valence band has a similar staircase distribution.

In contrast with bulk semiconductor, the quantum-well structure exhibits a substan-
tial density of states at its lowest allowed conduction-band energy level and at its
highest allowed valence-band energy level. This property has an important effect on
the optical characteristics of the material, as discussed in Sec. 18.2D.

764 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
|<— d, >| E
a= 2 “>
р Ч =1 р Вик
= ae
И ТЕ ee
Eg 1 с
| oe
92
—————>
x Density of states o(E)
Figure 17.1-27 Density of states for a quantum-well structure (solid curve) and for a bulk
semiconductor (dashed curve).
Multiquantum Wells and Superlattices
Multilayered structures comprising alternating semiconductor materials are known as
multiquantum-well (MQW) structures (Fig. 17.1-28). They can be fabricated so that
the energy bandgap varies with position in any desired way (see, e.g., Fig. 14.1-12).
A MQW structure can have any number of layers, from just a few to hundreds. As an
example, a MQW structure with 100 layers, each of thickness = 10 nm and containing
some 40 atomic planes, has an overall thickness = 1 ит. As discussed in Sec. 14.1D,
if the energy barriers between adjacent wells are sufficiently thin so that electrons
can readily tunnel through them, the discrete energy levels broaden into minibands, in
which case the multiquantum-well structure is referred to as a superlattice structure.
The transition from MQW subbands to superlattice minibands is analogous to the
transition from discrete energy levels in an atom to energy bands in a solid as the
atoms are brought into closer proximity and permitted to interact (see Figs. 14.1-9 and
14.1-10). Quantum wells and superlattices can also be created by spatially varying the
doping of a material, thereby creating space-charge fields that form potential barriers.
Figure 17.1-28 A MQW structure fabricated from alternating
layers of materials of different bandgaps, such as AlGaAs
and GaAs. These particular materials are often used to illus-
trate multiquantum-well structures because they can be lattice
matched over a broad range of compositions [see Fig. 17.1-
GaAs (а, which minimizes the strain between the two lattices,
and because of their large difference in bandgap energies
AlGaAs [see Table 17.1-2], which provides substantial carrier con-
finement. Other combinations of MQW materials commonly
used in photonics include AlInAsSb/GaSb, AlInAs/InGaAs,
AlInGaP/InGaP, GaN/InGaN, and Al,,Ga;_,N/Al,Gaj_,N.
Biased Multiquantum-Well Structures
The energy-band diagrams of unbiased and biased multiquantum-well and superlattice
structures are schematized in Fig. 17.1-29. The electric field causes the wells to become
canted and alters the energy levels. In superlattice structures, the discrete energy levels
smear into minibands. Multiquantum-well structures find use in a wide variety of
photonic devices, such as active regions in light-emitting diodes, semiconductor optical
amplifiers, and laser diodes (Secs. 18.1C, 18.2D, and 18.4, respectively). They also
serve as photodetectors (Sec. 19.2C) and modulators (Sec. 21.5).

174 SEMICONDUCTORS 765
P|] Minigap | |}
А РЁ РТ —
(a) (В) (с)
Figure 17.1-29 Energy-band diagrams of MQW and superlattice structures fabricated from
alternating layers of materials with different bandgaps, such as AlGaAs and GaAs. (a) Unbiased
MQW structure. (b) Biased MQW structure. (с) Biased superlattice structure with minibands and
minigap.
Quantum Wires
As discussed in Sec. 14.1D, a semiconductor material that takes the form of a thin
wire surrounded by a material of wider bandgap is called a quantum-wire structure
(Fig. 17.1-30). The wire acts as a potential well that narrowly confines electrons and
holes in two directions, т and у. Assuming that the wire has a rectangular cross section
of area 41 42, the energy-momentum relation in the conduction band is
hk?
E=E.+Eqa+&a+s—, (17.1-38)
2Me
where
12 (п/а)? h? (42п / 42)?
ка — 7/9 Е — (7/8) Чт, 42 = 1,2,3,...,
2Me 2тк
(17.1-39)
and К is the vector component in the z direction (along the axis of the wire).
x
E E E \ E
0‹(Е) a =
Е. Е‹|----7 Е. Е,
Вик Quantum well Quantum wire Quantum dot
Figure 17.1-30 The density of states in different confinement configurations. The conduction and
valence bands split into overlapping subbands that become successively narrower as the electron
motion is restricted in a greater number of dimensions.

766 — CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
Each pair of quantum numbers (41, 42) is associated with an energy subband that
has a density of states o0(k) = 1/7 per unit length of the wire and therefore 1/7d d2
per unit volume. The corresponding quantum-wire density of states (per unit volume),
as a function of energy, is
1/did2)(./me/V2 ть
(992) (уте/У2 xh) ) E> E.+ Eq + Eq
o-(E) = \/Е — Ес - Ем — Ea
0, otherwise,
Чт, 42 = 1,2,3,.... (17.1-40)
These are decreasing functions of energy, as illustrated in Fig. 17.1-30. The incorpora-
tion of quantum wires in devices will be discussed in Sec. 18.4B.
Quantum Dots
A quantum-dot structure narrowly confines the electrons in all three directions within
a region that can be modeled as a box of volume d;d2d3 (Sec. 14.1D). The energy is
therefore quantized to
F=E,+ Еа + Ес + Eqs, (17.1-41)
where
_ №? (ат/ а)? _ (ат / 45)? _ №2 (азл/4з)?
Ба = —.——_, EQ = —.——_, Ев = —.——_
2M¢ 2M¢ 2Me
The allowed energy levels are discrete and well separated so that the density of states
is represented by a sequence of delta functions at the allowed energies, as illustrated
in Fig. 17.1-30. Quantum dots are thus often called artificial atoms. Even though
they contain enormous numbers of strongly interacting natural atoms, the discrete
energy levels of the quantum dot can, in principle, be chosen at will by proper design.
Quantum-dot-based devices are considered in Chapters 18 and 19.

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS
We proceed to consider some of the basic optical properties of semiconductors, with
an emphasis on the processes of absorption and emission important in the operation of
photonic devices. This domain of study is known as semiconductor optics.

A. Photon Interactions in Bulk Semiconductors

A number of mechanisms can lead to the absorption and emission of photons in bulk

semiconductors. The most important of these are:

= Band-to-Band (Interband) Transitions. An absorbed photon can result in an elec-

tron in the valence band making an upward transition to the conduction band,
thereby creating an electron-hole pair [Fig. 17.2-1(a)]. Electron—hole recombi-
nation can result in the emission of a photon. Band-to-band transitions may be
assisted by one or more phonons. A phonon is a quantum of the lattice vibrations
associated with molecular or acoustic vibrations of the atoms in a material.

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 767

i] мо

м мо

о — м Eee eee

E,=142eV $ Е =0.088 и _____ ‘]é,=0.66 eV

$6 65500000555020555555005 — 0099555550099000000900000 — 9995550500995000000900000

(а) (Б) (с)
Figure 17.2-1 Examples of absorption and emission of photons in bulk semiconductors. (a) Band-
to-band transitions in GaAs can result in the absorption or emission of photons of wavelength
Ло < Ag = 16 /Е, = 0.87 ym. (6) The absorption of a photon of wavelength A4 = hc,/E4 =
14 ym results in a valence-band to acceptor-level transition in Hg-doped Ge (Ge:Hg). (с) Free-carrier
transitions within the conduction band of Ge.
= [mpurity-to-Band Transitions. An absorbed photon can result in a transition be-
tween a donor (or acceptor) level and a band in a doped semiconductor. In a
p-type material, for example, a low-energy photon can lift an electron from the
valence band to the acceptor level, where it becomes trapped by an acceptor atom
[Fig. 17.2-1(b)]. A hole is created in the valence band and the acceptor atom is
ionized. Or a hole may be trapped by an ionized acceptor atom; the result is that
the electron decays from its acceptor level to recombine with the hole. The energy
may be released radiatively (in the form of an emitted photon) or nonradiatively
(in the form of phonons). The transition may also be assisted by traps in defect
states, as illustrated in Fig. 17.1-18.

= Free-Carrier (Intraband) Transitions. An absorbed photon can impart its energy
to an electron in a given band, causing it to move higher within that band. An
electron in the conduction band, for example, can absorb a photon and move
to a higher energy level within the conduction band [Fig. 17.2-1(c)]. This is
followed by thermalization, a process whereby the electron relaxes down to the
bottom of the conduction band while releasing its energy in the form of phonons.
The strength of free-carrier absorption is proportional to the carrier density; it
decreases with photon energy as a power-law function.

= Phonon Transitions. Long-wavelength photons can release their energy by di-

rectly exciting lattice vibrations, 1.е., by creating phonons.

= Excitonic Transitions. The absorption of a photon in a semiconductor can result

in the formation of a free electron in the conduction band and a hole that rises to
the top of the valence band, where its energy is minimized. The hole and electron
can be bound together by their mutual Coulomb attraction to form an exciton;
the attractive potential results in a reduction of the total energy of the electron
and hole. This entity is much like a hydrogen atom in which a hole plays the
role of the proton. Excitons typically have lifetimes that range from hundreds of
picoseconds to nanoseconds. A photon may be emitted as a result of the electron
and hole recombining, thereby annihilating the exciton.

These transitions all contribute to the overall absorption coefficient, which is dis-
played in Fig. 17.2-2 for Si and GaAs, and at greater magnification in Fig. 17.2-3 for
a number of semiconductor materials. For photon energies greater than the bandgap
energy E,, the absorption is dominated by band-to-band transitions that form the basis
of many photonic devices. The spectral region where the material changes from being
relatively transparent (hv < E,) to strongly absorbing (hv > E,) is known as the
absorption edge. Direct-bandgap semiconductors have a more abrupt absorption edge

768 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
than indirect-bandgap materials, as is apparent in Figs. 17.2-2 and 17.2-3.
Wavelength Ло (ит)
100 10 1.0 0.2
107
10° — GaAs
—-- Si |
р 10° Free | Figure 17.2-2 Observed optical
5 exciton 1 absorption coefficient a versus pho-
$ i rp pno
8 \ / ton energy and wavelength for Si and
5 104 / GaAs in thermal equilibrium at T =
р /Band- 300° К. The bandgap energy Е, is
3, to- 1.12 eV for Si and 1.42 eV for GaAs.
= 10 Е | band Silicon is relatively transparent in the
Е. carrier band Л» = 1.1 to 12 ит, whereas
8 102 Г intrinsic GaAs is relatively transpar-
< ent in the band Л» = 0.87 to 12 um
i (Fig. 5.5-1).
10 ii
Phonon Il a I
L771
1
0.01 0.1 1.0 10.0
Photon energy hv (eV)
Wavelength Ло (ит)
10543 2 15 1009 08 0.7 06 0.5 0.4 0.3
10°
Е
2
Е 10°F InSb InP
2
ES
© 10°
о
3
8
8 10°
я InAs Ge /| GaAs GaP GaN
10
0 0.5 1.0 15 2.0 25 3.0 35 4.0 4.5
Photon energy hv (eV)
Figure 17.2-3 Absorption coefficient versus photon energy and wavelength for Ge, Si, GaAs,
GaN, and several other Ш-У binary semiconductors at T’ = 300° К, on an expanded scale. Direct-
and indirect-bandgap materials follow different functional forms near the band edge.
B. Interband Transitions in Bulk Semiconductors
We proceed to develop a simple theory of direct interband (band-to-band) photon
absorption and emission in bulk semiconductors, ignoring the other types of transitions.
Bandgap Wavelength
Direct interband absorption and emission can take place only at frequencies for which
the photon energy hy > E,. The minimum frequency и necessary for this to occur is
Vv, = E,/h, so that the corresponding maximum wavelength is Лу = Co/Vg = hceo/ Eg.

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 769
If the bandgap energy is given in eV (rather than in J), the bandgap wavelength A, =
hco/eE, in ил turns out to be
1.24
Ag = =: (17.2-1)
9 Bandgap Wavelength
Ag (um) and Е, (eV)
The quantity Лу is known as the bandgap wavelength (or cutoff wavelength).

The bandgap wavelength Лу, and its associated bandgap energy E,, are provided in
Table 17.1-2, and in Figs. 17.1-7 and 17.1-8, for a number of semiconductor materials
of importance in photonics. Ш-У ternary and quaternary semiconductors of different
compositions span a substantial range of bandgap wavelengths, from the mid infrared
to the mid-ultraviolet.

Conditions for Photon Absorption and Emission
Electron excitation from the valence to the conduction band may be induced by the
absorption of a photon of appropriate energy (hv > E, or \ < Лу). An electron-hole
pair is generated [Fig. 17.2-4(a)]. This adds to the concentration of mobile charge
carriers and increases the conductivity of the material. The material behaves as a
photoconductor with a conductivity proportional to the photon flux. This effect is used
for the photodetection of light (Chapter 19).
hv
hv
hv
E
ИИ aul
ali tt
LLLLIIiititititiiis ,- ALLLLitiiitiiii pi) LLLLiiiiitisisisitys ОЧ
@) ‘ () у (© у
Figure 17.2-4 (a) The absorption of a photon results in the generation of an electron-hole pair.
This process is used for the photodetection of light. (b) The recombination of an electron-hole pair
results in the spontaneous emission of a photon. Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) operate on this basis.
(с) Electron—hole recombination can be induced by a photon. The result is the stimulated emission
of an identical photon. This is the underlying process responsible for the operation of semiconductor
laser diodes.

Electron de-excitation from the conduction to the valence band (electron-hole re-
combination) may result in the spontaneous emission of a photon of energy hv > E,
[Fig. 17.2-4(6)], or in the stimulated emission of a photon [Fig. 17.2-4(c)] when a
photon of energy hy > E, is initially present (Sec. 14.3). Spontaneous emission is the
underlying phenomenon on which the light-emitting diode is based (Sec. 18.1). Stimu-
lated emission is responsible for the operation of semiconductor optical amplifiers and
laser diodes (Secs. 18.2—18.6).

The conditions under which interband absorption and emission take place are sum-
marized as follows:

770 — CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
= Conservation of Energy. The absorption or emission of a photon of energy hy
requires that the energies of the two states involved in the interaction (say F
and Ep» in the valence band and conduction band, respectively, as depicted in
Fig. 17.2-4) be separated by hv. Thus, for photon emission to occur by electron—
hole recombination, for example, an electron occupying an energy level E2 must
interact with a hole occupying an energy level Ел, such that energy is conserved:
Е2 — Е1 = Ви. (17.2-2)
= Conservation of Momentum. Momentum must also be conserved in the process
of photon emission/absorption, so that pp — py = hv/c = h/X, ог kp — ky =
27/2. The magnitude of the photon momentum h/, is, however, very small in
comparison with the range of momentum values that electrons and holes can
assume. The semiconductor E—k diagram extends to values of К of the order
27/a, where the lattice constant a is much smaller than the wavelength A, so
that 27/A < 2т/а. The momenta of the electron and the hole participating in
the interaction must therefore be approximately equal. This condition, kg = ky,
is called the k-selection rule. Transitions that obey this rule are represented in
the E—-k diagram (Fig. 17.2-4) by vertical lines, indicating that the change in К is
negligible on the scale of the diagram.
= Energies and Momenta of the Electron and Hole with Which a Photon Interacts.
As is apparent from Fig. 17.2-4, conservation of both energy and momentum
requires that a photon of frequency v interact with electrons and holes of specific
energies and momenta determined by the semiconductor E-é relation. Using
(17.1-3) and (17.1-4) to approximate this relation for a direct-bandgap semicon-
ductor by two parabolas, and writing Ес — Е, = Ех, (17.2-2) may be written in
the form
h2 k2 h2 k2
Е — Е = —— +Е + —— =), (17.2-3)
2My 2Me
from which
2m
k= a (hv — E,), (17.2-4)
where
1 1 1
Е. (17.2-5)
Mr My Me
Substituting (17.2-4) into (17.1-3) provides the energy levels EF; and E2 with
which the photon interacts:
Mr
E, = Ес + — (hv - E,), (17.2-6)
Me
My
E, = E, — — (hv — E,) = Eo — hv. (17.2-7)
My
In the special case when те = My, we obtain Ez = Ес + $ (hv — E,), as required
by symmetry.
= Optical Joint Density of States. We now determine the density of states о(и) with
which a photon of energy hv interacts under conditions of energy and momentum
conservation in a direct-bandgap semiconductor. This quantity incorporates the
density of states in both the conduction and valence bands and is known as the
optical joint density of states. The one-to-one correspondence between EF» and

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 771
и embodied in (17.2-6) permits о(и) to be related to the density of states 0.(E2)
in the conduction band by use of the incremental relation o.(E2) dE2 = o(v) dv,
from which o(v) = (dE2/dv)o.(E2), so that
hm
o(v) = — ве (Е>). (17.2-8)
Me
Using (17.1-7) and (17.2-6), we finally obtain the number of interacting states per
unit volume per unit frequency,
2m,.)3/?
o(v) = Cry Vhv — Е, hv > Eg, (17.2-9)
п Optical Joint
Density of States
which is sketched in Fig. 17.2-5. The one-to-one correspondence between E, and
и in (17.2-7), together with 0,(E1) from (17.1-8), results in an expression for
o(v) identical to (17.2-9).
oY)
Figure 17.2-5 The density of states with which
a photon of energy hy interacts increases with
hv — E, in accordance with a square-root law.
Е hv
= Photon Absorption Is Not Unlikely in an Indirect-Bandgap Semiconductor. The
energy and momentum conservation required for photon absorption in an indirect-
bandgap semiconductor is readily accommodated by means of a two-step process
(Fig. 17.2-6). The electron is first excited to a high energy level within the con-
duction band by a k-conserving vertical transition. It then quickly relaxes to the
bottom of the conduction band by a process called thermalization, in which its
momentum is transferred to phonons. The generated hole behaves similarly. Since
the process occurs sequentially, it does not require the simultaneous presence of
three bodies and is thus not unlikely in indirect- bandgap semiconductors. Indeed,
Si and Ge are widely used as photodetector materials (Chapter 19), as are direct-
bandgap semiconductors such as AlGaAs and InGaAs.

E Figure 17.2-6 Photon absorption in an
indirect-bandgap semiconductor via а уег-
tical (k-conserving) transition. The photon

Photon generates an excited electron in the con-

absorption Thermalization duction band, leaving behind a hole in the
ANU valence band. The electron and hole then

undergo fast transitions — to the lowest and

highest available levels in the conduction and

valence bands, respectively, releasing their

energy in the form of phonons. Since the

k process is sequential, it is not unlikely.

772 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS

= Photon Emission Is Unlikely in an Indirect-Bandgap Semiconductor. Radiative
electron-hole recombination is unlikely in an indirect-bandgap semiconductor.
This is because a transition from near the bottom of the conduction band to near
the top of the valence band (where electrons and holes are most likely to reside,
respectively) requires an exchange of momentum that cannot be accommodated
by the emitted photon (Fig. 17.2-7). Momentum may be conserved, however, by
the participation of phonons in the interaction. Phonons can carry relatively large
momenta but typically have small energies (= 0.01-0.1 eV; see Fig. 17.2-2),
so that their transitions appear horizontal on the E—k diagram as portrayed in
Fig. 17.2-7. The net result is that the k-selection rule is violated but momentum
is conserved. However, because phonon-assisted emission involves the simulta-
neous participation of three bodies (electron, photon, and phonon), the proba-
bility of its occurrence is substantially reduced. Thus, Si, which is an indirect-
bandgap semiconductor, has a substantially lower radiative recombination coef-
ficient than does GaAs, which is a direct-bandgap semiconductor (Table 17.1-4).
Silicon therefore does not emit light efficiently via interband transitions, whereas
GaAs does. However, under special circumstances it is sometimes possible to
elicit photon emission from an indirect-bandgap semiconductor; a particular situ-
ation where this can be achieved is considered in Example 17.2-1.

E Figure 17.2-7 Photon emission via an
interband transition in an indirect-bandgap
semiconductor. The recombination of an
electron near the bottom of the conduction

H band with a hole near the top of the valence
| Photon band requires the exchange of energy and
Е AW momentum. The energy may be carried off
Ehonon y by a photon, but one or more phonons are
required to conserve momentum. Such a
simultaneous multiparticle interaction has a
п reduced likelihood of taking place.
ини |
EXAMPLE 17.2-1. Photon Emission from Indirect-Bandgap Germanium. — Under
some circumstances, the application of an externally applied mechanical stress can result in an
attendant strain in a material that results in a crossover from indirect- to direct-bandgap behavior.
Germanium is one such material, as evidenced by the operation of the Ge laser diode. An electrically
pumped, Fabry—Perot Ge heterostructure uses a combination of mechanical strain and n-type doping
to achieve laser action." The tensile strain in the plane of the layer serves to transform the indirect
bandgap of Ge to a direct bandgap by equalizing the energies of the direct-bandgap (Г) valley and
the energetically lowest indirect-bandgap (L) valley in its band structure. A biaxial tensile strain of
0.2% is introduced by forming a heterojunction of Ge and Si at high temperature; upon cooling the
Ge becomes strained because of the thermal-expansion mismatch between the two materials. The
germanium is doped with phosphorus at a concentration of 4 x 1013 cm~°, which provides sufficient
gain to overcome the losses associated with an electrically pumped device. The width of the pump
current pulses lies between 20 jus and 100 ms, and the device is operated with a duty cycle of 4% to
avoid undue heating. Room-temperature operation yields 1 mW of multimode optical output power
at a wavelength that is tunable between 1.5 and 1.7 wm. The operation of the Ge heterostructure laser
demonstrates that bandgap engineering can, in principle, be used to elicit recombination radiation
from an inherently indirect-bandgap material.
ини |
ТВ. Е. Camacho-Aguilera, У. Cai, М. Patel, J. Т. Bessette, М. Romagnoli, L. С. Kimerling, and J. Michel, An
Electrically Pumped Germanium Laser, Optics Express, vol. 20, pp. 11316-11320, 2012.

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 773

C. Absorption, Emission, and Gain in Bulk Semiconductors

We now proceed to determine the probability densities of a photon of energy hy being

emitted or absorbed by a bulk semiconductor material in a direct interband transition.

Conservation of energy and momentum, in the form of (17.2-4), (17.2-6), and (17.2-

7), determines the energies EF, and E2, and the momentum fk, of the electrons and

holes with which the photon may interact. Three factors determine these probability

densities, as discussed below:

1. Occupancy probabilities

2. Transition probabilities

3. Optical joint density of states
Occupancy Probabilities
The occupancy conditions for photon emission and absorption by means of transitions
between the discrete energy levels E2 and E, are stated as follows:

Emission condition: A conduction-band state of energy E¢ is filled (with an electron)
and a valence-band state of energy E is empty (i.e., filled with a hole).

Absorption condition: A conduction-band state of energy E2 is empty and a valence-
band state of energy EF, is filled.

The probabilities that these occupancy conditions are satisfied for various values of
E, and E, are determined from the appropriate Fermi functions f.(E) and f,,(E) asso-
ciated with the conduction and valence bands of a semiconductor in quasi-equilibrium.
Thus, the probability f.(v) that the emission condition is satisfied for a photon of
energy hy is the product of the probabilities that the upper state is filled and that the
lower state is empty since these are independent events, 1.е.,

fe(v) = f-(E2) [1 — fo(E1))- (17.2-10)
The energies E, and E2 are related to и by (17.2-6) and (17.2-7). Similarly, the proba-
bility Г, (и) that the absorption condition is satisfied is

fa(v) = [1 — f-(E2)] fo(E1). (17.2-11)
ee

EXERCISE 17.2-1

Requirement for the Photon Emission Rate to Exceed the Absorption Rate.

(a) For a bulk semiconductor in thermal equilibrium, show that f.(v) is always smaller than f,(v)
so that the rate of photon emission cannot exceed the rate of photon absorption.

(b) For a semiconductor in quasi-equilibrium (Е = Ey,), with radiative transitions occurring
between a conduction-band state of energy Е> and a valence-band state of energy E, with the
same value of k, show that emission is more likely than absorption if the separation between the
quasi-Fermi levels is larger than the photon energy, 1.е., if

Epo — Epy > hv. (17.2-12)

Condition for Net Emission

What does this condition imply about the locations of E;, relative to Ес, and Ey, relative to E,,?
ee

774 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
Transition Probabilities
Satisfying the emission/absorption occupancy condition does not assure that the
emission/absorption actually takes place. These processes are governed by the proba-
bilistic laws of interaction between photons and atomic systems examined at length in
Secs. 14.3А-14.3С (see also Exercise 14.3-1). As they relate to semiconductors, these
laws are generally expressed in terms of emission into (or absorption from) a narrow
band of frequencies between и and и + dv:
Summary
A radiative transition between two discrete energy levels E, and Ep is charac-
terized by a transition cross section o(v) = (A~/87tsp)g(v), where и is the
frequency, $.» is the effective spontaneous lifetime, and g(v) is the lineshape func-
tion [centered about the transition frequency v9 = (E2 — E,)/h, with transition
linewidth Av and with unity area]. In semiconductors, the radiative electron-hole
recombination lifetime 7,, which was discussed in Sec. 17.1D, plays the role of
tsp So that
2
= —_— . 17.2-13
o(v) = 9) (1722-13)
= If the occupancy condition for emission is satisfied, the probability density
(per unit time) for the spontaneous emission of a photon into any of the
available radiation modes in the narrow frequency band between и and v+dv
1S
1
Руь(и) dv = — g(v) dv. (17.2-14)
Tr
= If the occupancy condition for emission is satisfied and a mean spectral
photon-flux density ¢, (photons per unit time per unit area per unit fre-
quency) at frequency и is present, the probability density (per unit time)
for the stimulated emission of one photon into the narrow frequency band
between v and v + dv is
2
И/; (к) dv = фь o(v) dv = ¢, — g(v) dv. (17.2-15)
8пт:
= If the occupancy condition for absorption is satisfied and а mean spectral
photon-flux density ¢, at frequency v is present, the probability density for
the absorption of one photon from the narrow frequency band between v and
v + dv is also given by (17.2-15).
Since each transition has a different central frequency vo, and since we are consid-
ering a collection of such transitions, we explicitly label the central frequency of the
transition by writing g(v) as g,o(v). In semiconductors the homogeneously broadened
lineshape function до (и) associated with a pair of energy levels generally has its origin
in electron—phonon collision broadening. It therefore typically exhibits a Lorentzian
lineshape [see (14.3-34) and (14.3-38)] of width Ди = 1/л То, where the electron—
phonon collision time То is of the order of picoseconds. If Tz = 1 ps, for example,
then Av = 318 GHz, corresponding to an energy width hAv = 1.3 meV. The
radiative lifetime broadening of the levels is negligible in comparison with collisional
broadening.

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 775
Overall Emission and Absorption Transition Rates
For a pair of energy levels separated by Ez — Е! = hi, the rates of spontaneous
emission, stimulated emission, and absorption of photons of energy Av (in units of
photons / s-Hz-cm? of the semiconductor material), at the frequency v, are obtained as
follows: The appropriate transition probability density Ру» (и) ог W;(v) [as provided in
(17.2-14) or (17.2-15)] is multiplied by the appropriate occupation probability f.(vo)
or fa(vo) [as given in (17.2-10) or (17.2-11)], and by the density of states that can
interact with the photon @(v) [as set forth in (17.2-9)]. The overall transition rate for
all allowed frequencies is then calculated by integrating over 1.
The rate of spontaneous emission at frequency и, for example, is given by
fsp(V) = ат fe(v) (vo) dv. (17.2-16)
When the collision-broadened width Av is substantially less than the width of the
product f.(vo)e(vo), which is the usual situation, g,9(v) may be approximated by
5(v — м), whereupon the transition rate simplifies to rs,(v) = (1/7) o(v) (м). The
rates of stimulated emission and absorption are obtained in a similar fashion, and the
following formulas result:
1
rsp(V) = = alu) fe(v) (17.2-17)
№2
паи) = bug ov) fe(v) (17.2-18)
2
rab(V) = Фи o(v) fa(v). (17.2-19)
877; Emission and
Absorption Rates
These equations, together with (17.2-9)-(17.2-11), permit the rates of spontaneous
emission, stimulated emission, and absorption arising from direct interband transitions
(photons/s-Hz-cm*) to be calculated in the presence of a mean spectral photon-flux
density ¢, (photons /s-Hz-cm7). The products o(v) № (и) and o(v) fa(v) are analogous
to the products of the lineshape function and atomic number densities in the upper
and lower levels, 9(и) № and g(v) М1, respectively, used in Chapters 14—16 to study
emission and absorption in atomic systems.

The determination of the occupancy probabilities f.(v) and f,(v) requires knowl-
edge of the quasi-Fermi levels Ey, and Ерь. It is via the control of these two param-
eters (by the application of an external bias to a p—n junction, for example) that the
emission and absorption rates are modified to produce semiconductor photonic devices
that carry out different functions. Equation (17.2-17) is the basic result that describes
the operation of the light-emitting diode (LED), a semiconductor source based on
spontaneous emission (Sec. 18.1). Equation (17.2-18) is applicable to semiconductor
optical amplifiers and laser diodes, which operate on the basis of stimulated emission
(Secs. 18.2-18.6). Equation (17.2-19) is appropriate for semiconductor detectors that
function by means of photon absorption (see Sec. 19.1B).

Spontaneous-Emission Spectral Intensity in Thermal Equilibrium

A semiconductor in thermal equilibrium has only a single Fermi function so that (17.2-
10) becomes №(и) = f(E2){1 — f(E1)]. If the Fermi level lies within the bandgap,
away from the band edges by at least several times КТ, use may be made of the

776 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
exponential approximations to the Fermi functions, f(E2) = exp[—(E2 — Ey) /kT]
and 1 — f(E,) = exp[—(Ey — E1)/kT], whereupon f.(v) = exp[—(E2 — E1)/kT],
1.е.,
hv
А —— |. 17.2-20
fe(v) exo( ur) ( )
Substituting (17.2-9) for 0(и) and (17.2-20) for f-(v) into (17.2-17) therefore provides
hy — Е
rsp(V) © Do \/hv — Е, exp =) hv > Eg, (17.2-21)
where
(2m,.)°/? Ey
Do = —— —— 17.2-22
° Th? T, exP kT ( )
is a parameter that increases with temperature at an exponential rate.

The spontaneous emission rate (17.2-21), which is plotted versus hv in Fig. 17.2-8,
comprises two factors: a function associated with the density of states that increases
as the square-root of hv — E,, and an exponentially decreasing function of hy — E,
arising from the Fermi function. The spontaneous emission rate can be increased by
augmenting f.(v). In accordance with (17.2-10), this can be achieved by purposely
causing the material to depart from thermal equilibrium in such а way that f.(E2) is
made large and },(Ет) is made small. This assures an abundance of both electrons
and holes, which is the desired condition for the operation of an LED, as discussed in
Sec. 18.1.

Fp)
Figure 17.2-8 Spectral intensity of
the direct interband spontaneous emis-
sion rate г.р(и) (photons/s-Hz-cm?)
from a semiconductor in thermal equi-
librium, as a function of hv. The spec-
trum has a low-frequency cutoff at v =
E,/h and extends over a range of fre-

| quencies of approximate width 2kT/h.
Eg hv

Gain Coefficient in Quasi-Equilibrium

The net gain coefficient Yo(v) corresponding to the rates of stimulated emission and

absorption in (17.2-18) and (17.2-19) is determined by taking a cylinder of unit area

and incremental length dz, and assuming that a mean spectral photon-flux density is

directed along its axis (see Fig. 15.1-1). If 6,(z) and ¢,(z) + dd,(z) are the mean

spectral photon-flux densities entering and leaving the cylinder, respectively, dd, (z)

must be the mean spectral photon-flux density emitted from within the cylinder. The

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 777
incremental number of photons, per unit time per unit frequency per unit area, is
simply the number of photons gained, per unit time per unit frequency per unit volume
[rst(v) — rap(v)], multiplied by the thickness of the cylinder dz. Hence, dd,(z) =
[rst(V) — rab(v)] dz. Substituting the rates set forth in (17.2-18) and (17.2-19) leads to

dd, (z А?
п о) Lflv) = 09) = ив. = 172-23)
The net gain coefficient is therefore
2
Yo(v) = aan o(v) fa(v), (17.2-24)
ПТ Gain Coefficient
where the Fermi inversion factor Ду (и) takes the form
fy(v) = fe(v) — falv) = f-(E2) — fv(E1), (17.2-25)
as may be understood from (17.2-10) and (17.2-11), with E; and E> related to и by
(17.2-6) and (17.2-7). Comparing (17.2-24) with (15.1-4) reveals that o(v) (к) in the
semiconductor system plays the role of Ng(v) in the atomic system. Using (17.2-9),
the gain coefficient may be cast in the form
Yo(v) = Di hv — Ey (о), hv > E, (17.2-26a)
with р = Ут №. (17.2-26b)
h?7,

The sign and spectral form of the Fermi inversion factor (и) are governed by
the quasi-Fermi levels Er, and Ер», which in turn depend on the state of excitation of
the carriers in the semiconductor. As shown in Exercise 17.2-1, this factor is positive
(corresponding to a population inversion and net gain) only when Ey, — Ep, > hv.
When the semiconductor is pumped to a sufficiently high level by means of an external
source of power, this condition may be satisfied and net gain achieved, as we shall
see in Sec. 18.2. This reflects the physics underlying the operation of semiconductor
optical amplifiers and laser diodes.

Absorption Coefficient in Thermal Equilibrium
A semiconductor in thermal equilibrium has only а single Fermi level Е; = Er, = Efy,
so that Я
Е) = (Е) = (Е) = —————_—_. 17.2-27

The factor (и) = fc(E2) — fo(E1) = f(E2) — f(E1) < 0, and therefore the gain
coefficient Yo(v’) is always negative [since Е› > Е! and f(E) decreases monotonically
with Е]. This is true whatever the location of the Fermi level Ех. Thus, a semiconductor
in thermal equilibrium, whether it be intrinsic or doped, always attenuates light. The
attenuation (absorption) coefficient, (и) = —yo(v), is therefore

Absorption Coefficient

778 — CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
where Е> and E; are given by (17.2-6) and (17.2-7), respectively, and Ду is given by
(17.2-26b).

If Ey lies within the bandgap but away from the band edges by an energy of at least
several times КТ, then f(E,) = 1 and f(E2) = 0 so that [f(E1) — f(E2)] = 1. In that
case, the direct interband contribution to the absorption coefficient is

23/2
a(v) = Ут 1 Jhv — E, . (17.2-29)

Tr (hv)?

Equation (17.2-29) is plotted in Fig. 17.2-9 for GaAs, using the following parameters:
п = 3.6, ть = 0.07 mo, My = 0.50 mo, по = 9.1 x 10-31 kg, a doping level such
that 7, = 0.4 ns (this differs from that given in Table 17.1-4 because of the difference
in doping level), Е, = 1.42 eV, and a temperature such that [f(E1) — f(E2)| = 1. As
the temperature increases, f(E1) — f(E2) decreases below unity and the absorption

coefficient set forth in (17.2-28) is reduced.

Wavelength Л, (jm)
104 2 1 0.5 04
Figure 17.2-9 Calculated absorp-
tion coefficient a(v) (cm~*) resulting
= from direct interband transitions, as
8 osxi04 Го a function of the photon energy Ви
< (eV) and the wavelength A, (ила), for
5 GaAs. This curve should be compared
with the empirical result displayed in
Fig. 17.2-3, which encompasses all
0 0 1 5 absorption mechanisms.
(hv — Eg) (eV)

In accordance with (17.2-29), absorption near the band edge in a direct-bandgap
semiconductor should follow the functional form ,/hv — E, . However, the sharp onset
of absorption at hy = E, is an idealization. As is evident in Fig. 17.2-3, direct-bandgap
semiconductors generally exhibit an exponential absorption tail, known as the Urbach
tail, with a characteristic width = КТ that extends slightly into the forbidden band.
This is associated with thermal and static disorder in the crystal arising from several
factors, including phonon-assisted absorption, randomness in the doping distribution,
and variations in material composition. Absorption near the band edge in indirect-
bandgap semiconductors (e.g., Ge, Si, and GaP in Fig. 17.2-3) generally follows the
functional form (hy — E,)? rather than the square-root relation applicable for direct-
bandgap semiconductors.
НИ
EXERCISE 17.2-2
Wavelength of Maximum Interband Absorption. Use (17.2-29) to determine the (free-space)
wavelength Ль at which the absorption coefficient of a semiconductor in thermal equilibrium is
maximum. Calculate the value of \, for GaAs. Note that this result applies only to absorption
mediated by direct interband transitions.
ee

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 779
D. Photon Interactions in Quantum-Confined Structures
Multiquantum-well and superlattice structures were considered in Sec. 17.1G. The
photon interactions in these structures bear a considerable resemblance to those for
bulk semiconductors (Sec. 17.2A). Several mechanisms play important roles in ab-
sorption and emission in quantum-confined structures:
= Interband (band-to-band) transitions
= Excitonic transitions
= Intersubband transitions
= Miniband transitions
These are illustrated in Fig. 17.2-10 and discussed below.
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 17.2-10 Photon absorption and emission in multiquantum-well structures. (a) Interband
transitions. (b) Excitonic transitions. (©) Intersubband transitions. (4) Miniband transitions in a
superlattice structure.
= Interband Transitions. Interband emission and absorption takes place between
states in the valence and conduction bands [Fig. 17.2-10(а)], much as in bulk
semiconductors. Because of quantum confinement, however, the optical joint den-
sity of states (17.2-9) must be replaced by (18.2-11). Interband transitions are
responsible for the operation of MQW light-emitting diodes, superluminescent
diodes, and laser diodes (Figs. 18.1-21, 18.2-11, and 18.4-4, respectively), as well
as MQW electroabsorption modulators (Fig. 21.5-2).
= Excitonic Transitions. The 1D carrier confinement associated with MQW struc-
tures results in an increase in the exciton binding energy. This leads to strong
excitonic transitions, even at T’ = 300° К, as schematized in Fig. 17.2-10(0).
Excitonic transitions play an important role in many quantum-confined devices,
including MQW electroabsorption modulators (Fig. 21.5-2).
и Intersubband Transitions. Transitions that take place between energy levels within
a single band of a MQW structure [Fig. 17.2-10(c)] are known as intersubband
transitions. Devices that operate on the basis of these intraband transitions in-
clude the quantum-well quantum cascade laser [Fig. 18.4-8(a)] and the quantum-
well infrared photodetector (Fig. 19.2-3). In the latter device, the absorption of
a photon causes a transition from a bound energy level to the continuum. The
picosecond carrier dynamics of intersubband systems offer large bandwidths.
= Miniband Transitions. In superlattices, the discrete MQW energy levels broaden
into minibands that are separated by minigaps. Such miniband transitions
[Fig. 17.2-10(d)] play a crucial role in the operation of superlattice quantum
cascade lasers [Fig. 18.4-8(6)]. Such transitions, as well as intersubband transi-
tions, exhibit fast relaxation and large nonlinearities, and are therefore appealing
for applications such as all-optical switching and demultiplexing.

780 — CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
E. Quantum-Dot Single-Photon Emitters
Quantum dots, which can be excited optically or electrically, emit only one photon at
a time; the emitted photons are thus separated from each other in time (antibunched)
and the light is generally sub-Poisson (Sec. 13.3C). When embedded in photonic struc-
tures such as microcavities, 2D materials, and semiconductor heterostructures, quan-
tum dots are thus useful for fabricating single-photon emitters (SPEs). Efficient, on-
demand sources of pure single photons that are highly indistinguishable are impor-
tant for implementing quantum information processing, communications, computing,
and cryptography in the form of scalable systems. Several examples of quantum-dot
single-photon emitters are provided below. Other approaches can also be employed
for creating SPEs, including the use of diamond defect centers, single-walled carbon
nanotubes, and defects in 2D materials.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 17.2-2. Silicon-Photonics Quantum-Dot Emitter. The confinement of
carriers in a quantum dot results in a reduction of their positional uncertainty Ax. Since Ax Ak > 3,
in accordance with (A.2-6) of Appendix A, this is accompanied by a concomitant increase in
the wavenumber uncertainty Ak. The increase in Ak obviates the need for phonons to take part
in radiative recombination. The use of quantum-dot structures in this context is analogous to
the incorporation of nitrogen impurities at sharply localized positions in indirect-bandgap GaP
to make GaP:N LEDs (Sec. 18.1C). The small size of the quantum dot therefore measurably
enhances radiative recombination via interband transitions in an indirect-bandgap semiconductor
such as Si. Furthermore, surface passivation enhances the radiative rate via induced surface-localized
excitons. As a result, light emission from silicon nanoparticles and porous silicon becomes possible.
|-25 pm —
EXAMPLE 17.2-3. Quantum-Dot/Micropillar Single-Photon Emitter. а
A single InAs/GaAs self-assembled quantum dot embedded in а 2.5-ит-Фатеет, ——
cryogenically cooled micropillar microcavity (Sec. 11.4B) efficiently generates —
indistinguishable photons of high purity (one and only one photon is emitted at a a
time) via resonance fluorescence. By virtue of the micropillar’s small cavity volume
and high quality factor (Q = 6124) the Purcell spontaneous-emission enhancement =
factor provided in (14.3-48) is Fp = 6. A single-mode optical fiber efficiently Se
coupled to the micropillar microcavity funnels = 3.7 x 10° single photons/s out of the —
device. Excitation is provided by 25-nW, 3-ps near-infrared pulses at Ло = 897 nm, —
resonant with the microcavity, at a repetition rate of 81 MHz. The photon extraction ae
efficiency is 66% while the overall system efficiency is 4.5%. The source is about a —
factor of ten brighter than that provided by a two-photon heralded device based on &
spontaneous parametric downconversion (Sec. 13.3D).
EXAMPLE 17.2-4. Single-Photon Emission from 2D Materials. The large bandgap
(Е, = 6 eV) of hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), an insulating 2D material, facilitates its use as a
host for quantum-dot single-photon emitters. Advantages of using this 2D host include: 1) room-
temperature operation; 2) the ability to localize the emitter; and 3) the elimination of decoherence and
background luminescence from a third dimension. Semiconducting 2D materials can also serve as
single-photon emitters. Deterministic arrays of hundreds of photoluminescent single-photon emitters
can be fabricated by depositing monolayers of transition-metal dichalcogenides such as WSe2 and
WS: onto silica substrates patterned with arrays of nanopillars (150-nm diameter x 100-nm height).
The nanopillars create localized material deformations that accommodate the quantum confinement
of excitons and serve as the loci of photoluminescent single-photon emissions. When excited by
green light, these cryogenic devices emit at wavelengths ranging from the red to the near infrared.
ини |

17.2 INTERACTIONS OF PHOTONS WITH CHARGE CARRIERS 781
F. Refractive Index
The ability to control the refractive index of a semiconductor is important in the design
of many photonic devices, particularly those that make use of optical waveguides, laser
diodes, and integrated photonics. Semiconductor materials are dispersive, so that the
refractive index is dependent on the wavelength. Indeed, the refractive index is related
to the absorption coefficient a(v) inasmuch as the real and imaginary parts of the
susceptibility must satisfy the Kramers—Kronig relations (Sec. 5.5B and Sec. B.1 of
Appendix B). The group index and refractive index for GaAs, calculated from the
Sellmeier equation discussed in Sec. 5.5C, are displayed in Fig. 17.2-11. The refractive
index depends on temperature and doping level.

3.8

“ Figure 17.2-11 Refractive index n and
3 3.7 group index N for GaAs as a function of
mn the free-space wavelength \,. The results
5 3.6 N are determined from the Sellmeier equation
& SAL provided in Table 5.5-1.
м 35 ~~~ _
n ——<
34
1 2 3 4
Wavelength Ло (ит)

The refractive indices of selected elemental and binary bulk semiconductors, under
specific conditions and near the bandgap wavelength, are provided in Table 17.2-1. The
refractive indices of ternary and quaternary semiconductors can be approximated via
linear interpolation between the refractive indices of their components.

Table 17.2-1 Refractive indices of selected semi-
conductor materials.”
Material Refractive Index
Elemental semiconductors

Ge 4.0

Si 3.5
Ш-У binary semiconductors

AIN 2.2

AIP 3.0

AlAs 3.2

AISb 3.8

GaN 2.5

GaP 3.3

GaAs 3.6

GaSb 4.0

InN 3.0

InP 3.5

InAs 3.8

InSb 4.2
“Results reported are for photon energies near the bandgap
energy of the material (hv = E,) and at T = 300° К.

782 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
READING LIST

Semiconductor Materials, Growth, and Characterization

Т.Е. Ayers, T. Kujofsa, P. Rago, and J. Raphael, Heteroepitaxy of Semiconductors: Theory, Growth,
and Characterization, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2nd ed. 2017.

J. Orton and T. Foxon, Molecular Beam Epitaxy: A Short History, Oxford University Press, 2015.

О. К. Schroder, Semiconductor Material and Device Characterization, Wiley-IEEE, 3rd ed. 2015.

E. Prati and T. Shinada, eds., Single-Atom Nanoelectronics, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2013.

O. Oda, Compound Semiconductor Bulk Materials and Characterizations, Volume 2, World Scien-
tific, 2012.

P. M. Koenraad and M. E. Flatté, Single Dopants in Semiconductors, Nature Materials, vol. 10,
pp. 91-100, 2011.

М. Razeghi, The MOCVD Challenge: A Survey of GalInAsP-InP and GalnAsP-GaAs for Photonic
and Electronic Device Applications, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2010.

Graphene and 2D-Material Photonics

S. Cahangirov, H. Sahin, G. Le Lay, and A. Rubio, Introduction to the Physics of Silicene and Other
2D Materials, Springer-Verlag, 2017.

P. Avouris, T. Е. Heinz, and Т. Low, eds., 2D Materials: Properties and Devices, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2017.

Р. Ajayan, P. Kim, and К. Banerjee, Two-dimensional van der Waals Materials, Physics Today,
vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 38-44, 2016.

С. Jagadish and Е. К. Weber, eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Е. Jacopi, J. J. Boeckl, and
C. Jagadish, eds., Volume 95, 2D Materials, Academic Press/Elsevier, 2016.

E. L. Wolf, Graphene: A New Paradigm in Condensed Matter and Device Physics, Oxford University
Press, 2016.

P. A. D. Gongalves and N. M. R. Peres, An Introduction to Graphene Plasmonics, World Scientific,
2016.

Z. Sun, A. Martinez, and F. Wang, Optical Modulators with 2D Layered Materials, Nature Photonics,
vol. 10, pp. 227-238, 2016.

A. C. Ferrari et al., Science and Technology Roadmap for Graphene, Related Two-Dimensional
Crystals, and Hybrid Systems, Nanoscale, vol. 7, pp. 4598-4810, 2015.

Е Xia, H. Wang, О. Xiao, М. Dubey, and A. Ramasubramaniam, Two-Dimensional Material
Nanophotonics, Nature Photonics, vol. 8, рр. 899-907, 2014.

А. К. Geim, Nobel Lecture: Random Walk to Graphene, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 83, pp. 85 1-
862, 2011.

K. S. Novoselov, Nobel Lecture: Graphene: Materials in the Flatland, Reviews of Modern Physics,
vol. 83, pp. 837-849, 2011.

Semiconductor Physics, Optics, and Devices

See also the reading lists in Chapters 18 and 19.

C. Jagadish and E. R. Weber, eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Z. Mi and C. Jagadish, eds.,
Volume 96, III-Nitride Semiconductor Optoelectronics, Academic Press/Elsevier, 2017.

M. Grundmann, The Physics of Semiconductors: An Introduction Including Nanophysics and Appli-
cations, Springer-Verlag, 3rd ed. 2016.

M. Rudan, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Springer-Verlag, 2015.

B. G. Streetman and S. Banerjee, Solid State Electronic Devices, Pearson, 7th ed. 2014.

G. Grosso and G. V. Parravicini, Solid State Physics, Academic Press/Elsevier, 2nd ed. 2014.

$. H. Simon, The Oxford Solid State Basics, Oxford University Press, paperback ed. 2013.

B. K. Ridley, Quantum Processes in Semiconductors, Oxford University Press, 5th ed. 2013.

W. Barford, Electronic and Optical Properties of Conjugated Polymers, Oxford University Press, 2nd
ed. 2013.

S. M. Sze and M. K. Lee, Semiconductor Devices: Physics and Technology, Wiley, 3rd ed. 2012.

C. F. Klingshirn, Semiconductor Optics, Springer-Verlag, 4th ed. 2012.

READING LIST 783

M. Kira and S. W. Koch, Semiconductor Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2012.

S. O. Kasap, Optoelectronics and Photonics: Principles and Practices, Pearson, 2nd ed. 2012.

S. Adachi, The Handbook on Optical Constants of Semiconductors: In Tables and Figures, World
Scientific, 2012.

W. Briitting and C. Adachi, eds., Physics of Organic Semiconductors, Wiley-VCH, 2nd ed. 2012.

D. A. Neamen, Semiconductor Physics and Devices: Basic Principles, McGraw-Hill, 4th ed. 2011.

T. Yoshimura, Thin-Film Organic Photonics: Molecular Layer Deposition and Applications, CRC
Press/Taylor & Francis, 2011.

J. Chu and A. Sher, Device Physics of Narrow Gap Semiconductors, Springer-Verlag, 2010.

M. Fox, Optical Properties of Solids, Oxford University Press, paperback 2nd ed. 2010.

P. Yu and M. Cardona, Fundamentals of Semiconductors: Physics and Materials Properties, Springer-
Verlag, 4th ed. 2010.

S. L. Chuang, Physics of Photonic Devices, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2009.

H. Haug and S. W. Koch, Quantum Theory of the Optical and Electronic Properties of Semiconduc-
tors, World Scientific, 5th ed. 2009.

H. Morkog, Handbook of Nitride Semiconductors and Devices, Volume I: Materials Properties,
Physics and Growth; Volume II: Electronic and Optical Processes in Nitrides; Volume Ш: GaN-
Based Optical and Electronic Devices, Wiley-VCH, 2008.

T. Meier, P. Thomas, and S. W. Koch, Coherent Semiconductor Optics: From Basic Concepts to
Nanostructure Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2007.

$. М. Sze and К. К. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, 3rd ed. 2006.

A. Moliton, Optoelectronics of Molecules and Polymers, Springer-Verlag, 2006, paperback ed. 2011.

C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, 8th ed. 2004, paperback ed. 2012.

К. К. Ng, Complete Guide to Semiconductor Devices, Wiley-IEEE, 2nd ed. 2002.

W. W. Chow and S. W. Koch, Semiconductor-Laser Fundamentals: Physics of the Gain Materials,
Springer-Verlag, 1999, paperback ed. 2010.

М. Riordan and L. Hoddeson, The Origins of the pn Junction, EEE Spectrum, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 46—
51, 1997.

P. T. Landsberg, Recombination in Semiconductors, Cambridge University Press, 1991, paperback
ed. 2003.

L. Esaki, Long Journey into Tunneling (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1973), in S. Lundqvist, ed., Nobel
Lectures in Physics 1971-1980, World Scientific, 1992.

J. I. Pankove, Optical Processes in Semiconductors, Prentice Hall, 1971; Dover, paperback ed. 2010.

W. B. Shockley, Transistor Technology Evokes New Physics (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1956), in
Nobel Lectures in Physics, 1942-1962, World Scientific, 1998.

J. Bardeen, Semiconductor Research Leading to the Point Contact Transistor (Nobel Lecture in
Physics, 1956), in Nobel Lectures in Physics, 1942—1962, World Scientific, 1998.

W. H. Brattain, Surface Properties of Semiconductors (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1956), in Nobel
Lectures in Physics, 1942-1962, World Scientific, 1998.

Quantum-Confined Materials and Nanostructures

See also the reading list on quantum-confined and microcavity devices in Chapter 18.

S. Y. Ren, Electronic States in Crystals of Finite Size: Quantum Confinement of Bloch Waves,
Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2017.

M. V. Fischetti and W. G. Vandenberghe, Advanced Physics of Electron Transport in Semiconductors
and Nanostructures, Springer-Verlag, 2016.

P. Harrison and A. Valavanis, Quantum Wells, Wires and Dots: Theoretical and Computational
Physics of Semiconductor Nanostructures, Wiley, 4th ed. 2016.

A. Zhang, G. Zheng, and C. M. Lieber, Nanowires: Building Blocks for Nanoscience and Nanotech-
nology, Springer-Verlag, 2016.

C. Jagadish and E. R. Weber, eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, S. A. Dayeh, A. Fontcuberta i
Morral, and C. Jagadish, eds., Volume 94, Semiconductor Nanowires II: Properties and Applica-
tions, Academic Press/Elsevier, 2016.

784 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS

С. В. Kagan, Е. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent, and О. У. Talapin, Building Devices from Colloidal Quantum
Dots, Science, vol. 353, aac5523, 2016.

У. $. Zhao, ed., Organic Nanophotonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2015.

Н. Оп and М. J. М. Horing, eds., Low Dimensional Semiconductor Structures: Characterization,
Modeling and Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2013.

D. Vollath, Nanomaterials: An Introduction to Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Wiley-VCH,
2nd ed. 2013.

G. Cao and Y. Wang, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications,
World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2011.

Е W. Wise, ed., Selected Papers on Semiconductor Quantum Dots, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 180), 2005.

L. Esaki, A Bird’s-Eye View on the Evolution of Semiconductor Superlattices and Quantum Wells,
IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. QE-22, рр. 1611-1624, 1986.

Single-Photon Emitters

X. He, М. Е Hartmann, Х. Ma, У. Kim, В. Ihly, J. L. Blackburn, W. Gao, J. Kono, У. Yomogida,
A. Hirano, T. Tanaka, H. Kataura, H. Htoon, and S. K. Doorn, Tunable Room-Temperature Single-
Photon Emission at Telecom Wavelengths from sp* Defects in Carbon Nanotubes, Nature Pho-
tonics, vol. 11, рр. 577—582, 2017.

C. Palacios-Berraquero, D. M. Kara, A. R.-P. Montblanch, M. Barbone, P. Latawiec, D. Yoon,
A. K. Ott, M. Loncar, A. C. Ferrari, and M. Atatiire, Large-Scale Quantum-Emitter Arrays in
Atomically Thin Semiconductors, Nature Communications 8, 15093 doi: 10.1038/ncomms 15093,
2017.

I. Aharonovich and M. Toth, Quantum Emitters in Two Dimensions, Science, vol. 358, pp. 170-171,
2017.

I. Aharonovich, D. Englund, and M. Toth, Solid-State Single-Photon Emitters, Nature Photonics,
vol. 10, pp. 631-641, 2016.

X. Ding, У. He, Z.-C. Duan, М. Gregersen, M.-C. Chen, $. Unsleber, $. Maier, С. Schneider,
М. Kamp, 5. Héfling, C.-Y. Lu, and J.-W. Pan, On-Demand Single Photons with High Extraction
Efficiency and Near-Unity Indistinguishability from a Resonantly Driven Quantum Dot in a
Micropillar, Physical Review Letters, vol. 116, 020401, 2016.

N. Somaschi, V. Giesz, L. De Santis, J. C. Loredo, M. P. Almeida, G. Hornecker, S. L. Portalupi,
T. Grange, С. Antén, J. Demory, С. Gémez, I. Sagnes, М. О. Lanzillotti-Kimura, A. Lemaitre,
A. Auffeves, A. G. White, L. Lanco, and P. Senellart, Near-Optimal Single-Photon Sources in the
Solid State, Nature Photonics, vol. 10, pp. 340-345, 2016.

P. Lodahl, S. Mahmoodian, and S. Stobbe, Interfacing Single Photons and Single Quantum Dots with
Photonic Nanostructures, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 87, pp. 347-400, 2015.

M. G. Raymer and K. Srinivasan, Manipulating the Color and Shape of Single Photons, Physics
Today, vol. 65, no. 11, рр. 32-37, 2012.

PROBLEMS

17.1-6 Donor-Electron Ionization Energies and Radii. Estimate the donor electron ionization

energies Ep and Bohr radii ао for the semiconductor materials listed below (see Sec. 14.1A

and Example 17.1-1). Comment, in each case, on the role of thermal excitations and use of
the bulk relative permittivities in your calculations.

(a) A silicon crystal, with electron effective mass т. = 0.98 mg (Table 17.1-1) and relative
permittivity ¢/€, = 12.3 (Table 17.2-1).

(b) A gallium arsenide crystal, with electron effective mass m. = 0.07 mo (Table 17.1-1)
and relative permittivity ¢/€, = 13 (Table 17.2-1).

(с) A gallium nitride crystal, with electron effective mass т. = 0.20 mp (Table 17.1-1)
and relative permittivity €/¢, = 6.25 (Table 17.2-1).

(d) A sample of Nat-doped polyacetylene, an n-type conjugated polymer semiconductor
with electron effective mass m, = mo and relative permittivity ¢/e, = 3. Organic light-
emitting diodes (OLEDs) operate on the basis of recombination radiation from bound
excitons.

PROBLEMS 785

17.1-7 Fermi Level of an Intrinsic Semiconductor. Given the expressions (17.1-12) and (17.1-
13) for the thermal equilibrium carrier concentrations in the conduction and valence bands:
(a) Determine an expression for the Fermi level Е; of an intrinsic semiconductor and show

that it falls exactly in the middle of the bandgap only when the effective mass of the
electrons те is precisely equal to the effective mass of the holes m..

(b) Determine an expression for the Fermi level of a doped semiconductor as a function of
the doping level and the Fermi level determined in (a).

17.1-8 Electron—Hole Recombination Under Strong Injection.Semiconductors!recombination
Consider electron-hole recombination under conditions of strong carrier-pair injection such
that the recombination lifetime can be approximated by т = 1/rAn, where г is the
recombination coefficient of the material and An is the injection-generated excess carrier
concentration. Assuming that the source of injection R is set to zero at t = to, find an analyt-
ical expression for An(t), demonstrating that it exhibits power-law rather than exponential
behavior.

17.1-9 Bowing Parameters for Ternary Semiconductors. The lattice constant of a ternary semi-
conductor alloy, say А,„В1_„С, typically varies linearly with the composition т, in accord-
ance with Vegard’s law. The bandgap energy E,, on the other hand, usually varies non-
linearly with x so that a plot of bandgap energy versus lattice constant exhibits a bowed
shape. This relation is usually modeled by the quadratic equation

ABC.) _ AC BC . . .
ED (2) = Epa + Es (1-2) —ba(1 — 2),

where b is called the bowing parameter. Use the curves provided in Figs. 17.1-7 and

17.1-8 to determine the bowing parameters for Al,Ga,_,As, СаАз1_„Р., Al,Gai_.N,

In,Ga,_,N, Al,Inj_,N, and Hg,Cd;_,Te. What significance does the bowing parameter

have with respect to lattice matching of the ternary compound to a substrate?

*17.1-10 Energy Levels in a GaAs/AlGaAs Quantum Well.

(a) Draw the energy-band diagram of a single-crystal multiquantum-well structure of
GaAs/AlGaAs to scale on the energy axis when the AlGaAs has the composition
Alo.3Gao.7As. The bandgap of GaAs, E,(GaAs), is 1.42 eV; the bandgap of AlGaAs
increases above that of GaAs by approximately 12.47 meV for each 1% increase in
the Al composition. Because of the inherent characteristics of these two materials, the
depth of the GaAs conduction-band quantum well is about 60% of the total conduction-
plus-valence band quantum-well depths.

(b) Assume that a GaAs conduction-band well has depth as determined in (a) above and has
precisely the same energy levels as the finite square well shown in Fig. 17.1-26(6), for
which (mVod*/2ih?)!/? = 4, where Vo is the depth of the well. Find the total width d
of the GaAs conduction-band well. The effective mass of an electron in the conduction
band of GaAs is т, = 0.07 mp = 0.64 x 10-31 kg.

17.2-3 Validity of the Approximation for Absorption/Emission Rates. The derivation of the rate
of spontaneous emission made use of the approximation g,o(v) = 6(v — vp) in the course
of evaluating the integral

1
rp(¥) = [|= go(v)| fe(Yo) a(vo) dvo.

(a) Demonstrate that this approximation is satisfactory for GaAs by plotting the functions
gvo(v), fe(vo), and о(шо) at T = 300° К and comparing their widths. GaAs is colli-
sionally lifetime broadened with То = 1 ps.

(b) Repeat (a) for the rate of absorption in thermal equilibrium.

17.2-4 Peak Spontaneous Emission Rate in Thermal Equilibrium.

(a) Determine the photon energy hv, at which the direct interband spontaneous emission
rate from a semiconductor material in thermal equilibrium achieves its maximum value
when the Fermi level lies within the bandgap and away from the band edges by at least
several КТ.

786 CHAPTER 17 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICS
(b) Show that this peak rate (photons per sec per Hz per cm?) is given by
,) — 2 Ve 2) ep Ey
'sp(Yp>) = —= = exp| —— |.
Pin) Pre Venter, POEL

(c) What is the effect of doping on this result?

(а) Assuming that 7, = 0.4 ns, те = 0.07 то, ть, = 0.50 mo, and Е, = 1.42 eV, find the
peak rate in GaAs at Т = 300° К.

17.2-5 Radiative Recombination Rate in Thermal Equilibrium.
(a) Show that the direct interband spontaneous emission rate integrated over all emission
frequencies (photons per sec per cm®) is given by
~ VE malo (ть) . Е
sp(V) dv = Do (КГ)? = т (КГ)? _—
оба = Do SF у = SPT тек р,
provided that the Fermi level is within the semiconductor energy bandgap and away
from the band edges. Note: | x'/?e~#® ах = (Мт/2) и 3.

(b) Compare this with the approximate integrated rate obtained by multiplying the peak
rate obtained in Prob. 17.2-4 by the approximate frequency width 2kT’/h shown in
Fig. 17.2-8.

(c) Using (17.1-15), set the phenomenological equilibrium radiative recombination rate
т, пр = r,n? (photons per second per cm?) introduced in Sec. 17.1D equal to the direct
interband result derived in (a) to obtain the expression for the radiative recombination
coefficient

V2 13/273 1
Ly = OT
(т. + ть,)3/2 (kT)3/?2 т,

(4) Use the result in (с) to find the value of г, for GaAs at Т = 300° К using т. =
0.07 то, My = 0.5 то, and т, = 0.4 ns. Compare this with the value provided in
Table 17.1-4 (r, == 10-19 cm/s).

CHAPTER
ee
LEDS AND LASER DIODES
18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 789

A. Injection Electroluminescence
B. LED Characteristics
C. Materials and Device Structures
D. Silicon Photonics
E. Organic LEDs
F. LED Lighting
18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS 817
A. Gain and Bandwidth
B. Pumping
С. Heterostructures
О. Quantum-Well Structures
E. Superluminescent Diodes
18.3 LASER DIODES 831
A. Amplification, Feedback, and Oscillation
B. Power and Efficiency
C. Spectral and Spatial Characteristics
18.4 QUANTUM-CONFINED LASERS 844
A. Quantum-Well and Multiquantum-Well Lasers
В. Quantum-Wire and Multiquantum-Wire Lasers
C. Quantum-Dot and Multiquantum-Dot Lasers
D. Quantum Cascade Lasers
18.5 MICROCAVITY LASERS 854
А. Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers
В. Microdisk and Microring Lasers
C. Photonic-Crystal Lasers
18.6 NANOCAVITY LASERS 862
Е = — |
The operation of semiconductor laser diodes was reported nearly simultaneously in 1962 by
independent research teams from the General Electric Corporation, IBM Corporation, and Lincoln
Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
787

CSC
Light can be emitted from a semiconductor material as a result of electron-hole recom-
bination. Nevertheless, materials capable of emitting such light do not glow at room
temperature because the concentrations of thermally excited electrons and holes are
too small to produce discernible radiation. However, an external source of energy can
be used to produce electron-hole pairs in sufficient numbers that they generate large
amounts of spontaneous recombination radiation, causing the material to luminesce. A
convenient way of achieving this is to forward bias a p—n junction, which fosters the
injection of electrons and holes in the vicinity of the junction. The ensuing recombina-
tion radiation is called injection electroluminescence.

A light-emitting diode (LED) is a forward-biased p—n junction, usually fabricated
from a direct-bandgap semiconductor material, that emits light via injection electro-
luminescence [Fig. 18.0-1(a)]. If the forward voltage is increased beyond a certain
point, however, the number of electrons and holes in the junction region can become
sufficiently large such that a population inversion is achieved, whereupon stimulated
emission (i.e., emission induced by the presence of photons) becomes more prevalent
than absorption. Under these conditions, the junction region may be used as a semi-
conductor optical amplifier (SOA) [Fig. 18.0-1(6)] or, with appropriate feedback, as a
laser diode (LD) [Fig. 18.0-1(c)].

+ - + | - + . -
п п п
| |
(а) (b) (c)
Figure 18.0-1 A forward-biased semiconductor р-п junction diode operated as: (a) a light-
emitting diode (LED); (b) a semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA); and (c) a laser diode (LD).

Semiconductor photon sources in the form of both LEDs and LDs serve as highly
efficient electronic-to-photonic transducers. They are indispensable in many applica-
tions by virtue of their small size, high brightness, high efficiency, high reliability,
ruggedness, and durability. Visible LEDs have long been used for indication appli-
cations (in which the observer directly views the source); examples include indicator
lights, mobile phones, signage, traffic signals, and backlighting. High-power visible
LEDs are ubiquitous in illumination applications (in which the observer views the
light scattered from objects illuminated by the source), such as architectural and street
lighting, flashlights, and projection.

Infrared LEDs are often used in remote controls for consumer products such as
optical mice, headphones, and keyboards. Ultraviolet LEDs are useful in applications
such as water purification, surgical sterilization, resin curing, and printing. They are
also used for the detection of chemical and biological agents, many of which fluoresce
at particular wavelengths when exposed to ultraviolet light.

Laser diodes find extensive use in long-haul optical fiber communication systems,
where it is a particular convenience that they can be readily modulated by controlling
the injected current. They also find use in high-density optical data-storage systems
788

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 789
such as DVD players, and in scanning, reading, and high-resolution color-printing
systems. Laser diodes are also employed in lidars and in directional lighting appli-
cations, such as automotive headlights. As discussed in Sec. 16.3A, banks of laser
diodes are used to optically pump optical fiber amplifiers and solid-state lasers, thereby
converting the relatively broadband, multimode laser-diode light into the narrowband,
single-mode light emitted by diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers.

The advent of quantum-confined semiconductor lasers such as multiquantum-well,
multiquantum-dot, and quantum cascade lasers, together with compact lasers such as
vertical-cavity, microdisk, and nanolasers, has greatly facilitated the integration of
lasers with other optical components in compact configurations, which in turn has
opened the door to manifold new uses.

This Chapter
This chapter is devoted to the study of light-emitting diodes (Sec. 18.1), semiconduc-
tor optical amplifiers (Sec. 18.2), laser diodes (Sec. 18.3), quantum-confined lasers
(Sec. 18.4), microcavity lasers (Sec. 18.5), and nanocavity lasers (Sec. 18.6). As back-
ground, we draw broadly on the material presented in Chapter 17. The theoretical treat-
ments offered for semiconductor optical amplifiers and laser-diode oscillators closely
parallel the analyses of laser amplifiers and laser oscillators provided in Chapters 15
and 16, respectively.

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES
Electroluminescence is a phenomenon in which light is emitted by a material that is
subjected to an electric field (Sec. 14.5). Injection electroluminescence, first observed
in 1907, underlies the operation of light-emitting diodes, which are highly efficient
devices capable of emitting light of just about any color. LEDs are highly important in
a number of areas of photonics. We discuss the theory of injection electroluminescence
in Sec. 18.1A, the characteristics of light-emitting diodes in Sec. 18.1B, representative
materials and device structures in Sec. 18.1C, the use of indirect-bandgap silicon for
generating light in Sec. 18.1D, organic LEDs in Sec. 18.1E, and LED lighting in
Sec. 18.18.
A. Injection Electroluminescence
Electroluminescence in Thermal Equilibrium
Electron—hole radiative recombination results in the emission of light from a semicon-
ductor material. At room temperature the concentration of thermally excited electrons
and holes is so small, however, that the generated photon flux is very small (Exam-
ple 18.1-1).
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 18.1-1. Photon Emission from GaAs т Thermal Equilibrium. At room
temperature, the intrinsic concentration of electrons and holes in GaAs is nj ~ 1.8 x 10° cm~?
(Table 17.1-3). Since the radiative electron-hole recombination coefficient r, ~ 10—10 cm?/s under
certain conditions (as specified in Table 17.1-4), the electroluminescence rate r,np = ryn? А
324 photons/cm®-s, as discussed in Sec. 17.10. A 2-ym-thick layer of GaAs therefore produces
а photon-flux density ф = 0.065 photons/cm?-s, which is negligible as may be understood by
consulting Table 13.2-1 (light emitted from a layer of GaAs thicker than about 2 ym suffers
reabsorption). Taking the photon energy hy as the bandgap energy for GaAs, FE, = 1.42 eV or
1.42е = 2.27 x 10-19 J, the emitted intensity turns out to be J = риф = 1.5 x 10-20 W/em?.
«ПИ

790 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

If thermal equilibrium conditions are maintained, this intensity cannot be apprecia-
bly increased (or decreased) by doping the material. In accordance with the law of
mass action provided in (17.1-17), the product np is fixed at n? if the material is not
too heavily doped so that the recombination rate r,np = г.п? depends on the doping
level only through r,. An abundance of electrons and holes is required for a large
recombination rate; in an n-type semiconductor n is large but p is small, whereas the
converse is true in a p-type semiconductor.

Electroluminescence in the Presence of Carrier Injection
The photon emission rate can be appreciably increased by using external means to
increase excess electron-hole pairs in the material. This may be accomplished, for
example, by illuminating the material with light, but it is typically achieved by for-
ward biasing a p—n junction diode, which serves to inject carrier pairs into the junc-
tion region. This process is illustrated in Fig. 17.1-21 and will be explained further
in Sec. 18.1B. The photon emission rate may be calculated from the electron-hole
pair injection rate К (pairs/cm?-s), where R plays the role of the laser pumping rate
(Sec. 15.2). The photon flux Ф (photons per second), generated within a volume И
of the semiconductor material, is directly proportional to the carrier-pair injection rate
(Fig. 18.1-1).
Emitted photons
Injected carriers (rate Ф) Figure 18.1-1 Spontaneous photon emis-
sion resulting from electron-hole radiative
(rate R) : : recombination, as might occur in a forward-
biased p—n junction.

Denoting the equilibrium concentrations of electrons and holes in the absence of
pumping as по and ро, respectively, we use п = ng +An and p = py+Ap to represent
the steady-state carrier concentrations in the presence of pumping (Sec. 17.1D). The
excess electron concentration An is precisely equal to the excess hole concentration
Ap because electrons and holes are produced in pairs. It is assumed that the excess
electron-hole pairs recombine at a rate 1/7, where т is the overall (radiative and
nonradiative) electron-hole recombination time. Under steady-state conditions, the
generation (pumping) rate must precisely balance the recombination (decay) rate, so
that А = An/r. Thus, the steady-state excess-carrier concentration is proportional to
the pumping rate, 1.е.,

An = Rr. (18.1-1)
For carrier injection rates that are sufficiently low, as explained in Sec. 17.1D, we
have т = 1/r(no + ро) where г is the (radiative and nonradiative) recombination
coefficient, so that R = rAn (no + ро).

Only radiative recombinations generate photons, however, and the internal quantum
efficiency 7; = r,/r = T/7;, defined in (17.1-28) and (17.1-30), accounts for the fact
that only a fraction of the recombinations are radiative in nature. The injection of RV
carrier pairs per second therefore leads to the generation of a photon flux ® = п; КУ
photons/s, 1.е.,

T Tr

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 791
The internal photon flux ® is proportional to the carrier-pair injection rate R and
therefore to the steady-state concentration of excess electron-hole pairs An.

The internal quantum efficiency 7; plays a crucial role in determining the per-
formance of this electron-to-photon transducer. Direct-bandgap semiconductors are
usually used to make LEDs (and laser diodes) because 7; is substantially larger than it
is for indirect-bandgap semiconductors (e.g., at room temperature 7; = 0.5 for GaAs,
whereas 7); = 10~° for Si, as shown in Table 17.1-4). The internal efficiency 77; depends
on the doping, temperature, and defect concentration of the material.
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 18.1-2. Injection Electroluminescence Emission from GaAs. Under сег-
tain conditions, we have т = 50 ns and n; = 0.5 for GaAs (Table 17.1-4), so that a steady-state
excess concentration of injected electron-hole pairs An = 10" cm~? will give rise to a photon
flux concentration 7;An/t = 1024 photons/cm?-s. This corresponds to an optical power density
А 2.3 x 10° W/cm? for photons at the bandgap energy Е, = 1.42 eV. A 2-jum-thick slab of GaAs
therefore produces an optical intensity of = 46 W/cm?, which is a factor of 10?! greater than the
thermal-equilibrium value calculated in Example 18.1-1. Under these conditions the power emitted
from a device of area 200 wm x 10 um is = 0.9 mW, which is substantial.
ПОНИ
Spectral Intensity of Electroluminescence Photons
The spectral intensity of injection electroluminescence light may be determined by
using the direct interband emission theory developed in Sec. 17.2. The rate of spon-
taneous emission r,,(v) (number of photons per second per Hz per unit volume), as
provided in (17.2-17), is

1
rsp(V) = — ou) felv), (18.1-3)
т
where т, is the radiative electron-hole recombination lifetime. The optical joint density
of states for interaction with photons of frequency v, as given in (17.2-9), is
(2m. )3/2
o(v) = a Vw — E,, (18.1-4)
where m, is related to the effective masses of the holes and electrons by 1/m, =
1/m, + 1/m, [as given in (17.2-5)], and E, is the bandgap energy. The emission
condition [as given in (17.2-10)] provides
fev) = fe(E2)[1 — №(Е1)], (18.1-5)
which is the probability that a conduction-band state of energy
m
EF, = E,+—(hv — E,) (18.1-6)
Me
is filled and a valence-band state of energy
is empty, as provided in (17.2-6) and (17.2-7) and illustrated in Fig. 18.1-2.

Equations (18.1-6) and (18.1-7) guarantee that energy and momentum are con-
served. The Fermi functions f.(E) = 1/{ехр[(Е — Ее) /КТ] + 1} and f,(E) =
1/{ехр[(Е — Е»)/КТ] + 1} that appear in (18.1-5), with quasi-Fermi levels Ey, and
Е», apply to the conduction and valence bands, respectively, under conditions of quasi-
equilibrium. The semiconductor parameters F,, т,, ™,, and те, and the temperature

792 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Ep Figure 18.1-2 The spontaneous emission
of a photon resulting from the recombination
Ест------ и oa hv of an electron of energy F 2 with a hole
WWW of energy Е! = Е> — hv. The transition
E, is represented by a vertical arrow because
Е | the momentum carried away by the photon,
fF L------- ря hv /c, is negligible on the scale of the figure.
1
—_> k
T, determine the spectral distribution rsp(V), given the quasi-Fermi levels Fr, and Ерь.
These in turn are determined from the concentrations of electrons and holes given in
(17.1-10) and (17.1-11):
Co
] 0 (Е) f-(E) dE =n = по + Ап; (18.1-8)
Ес
Ey
[`В - B(E))aE =p = po + Аа. (18.1-9)
—©
The densities of states near the conduction- and valence-band edges are, respectively,
as per (17.1-7) and (17.1-8),
2m,)3/? Wmy,)3/?
o.(E) = me) УЕ- Ес; o,(E) = ты) УЕ, -Е, (18.1-10)
277 hi 2128
where по and ро are the concentrations of electrons and holes in thermal equilibrium
(in the absence of injection), and An = Вт is the steady-state injected-carrier con-
centration. For sufficiently weak injection, such that the Fermi levels lie within the
bandgap and away from the band edges by several kT’, the Fermi functions may be
approximated by their exponential tails. The spontaneous photon flux (integrated over
all frequencies) is then obtained from the spontaneous emission rate rg,(v) by
°° V(m,)3/? Ere — Е» — Е,
ФЕУ|[ rep(v) dv = ——*—_ (КТ)? exp( КР), (18.1-1
| sp(V) V2 73/2 BB т. (kT) р kT ( )
as is readily extrapolated from Prob. 17.2-5.

Increasing the pumping level R causes An to increase, which in turn moves Ef, to-
ward (or further into) the conduction band, and Ey, toward (or further into) the valence
band. This results in an increase in the probability f.(E2) of finding the conduction-
band state of energy E filled with an electron, and the probability 1— f,,(E1) of finding
the valence-band state of energy E, empty (filled with a hole). The net result is that the
emission-condition probability f.(v) = f-(E2)[1 — f.(E1)| increases with К, thereby
enhancing the spontaneous emission rate given in (18.1-3) and the spontaneous photon
flux ® given above.
НИ
EXERCISE 18.1-1
Quasi-Fermi Levels of a Pumped Semiconductor.

(a) Under ideal conditions at ТГ = 0° К, when there is no thermal electron-hole pair generation
[Fig. 18.1-3(a)], show that the quasi-Fermi levels are related to the concentrations of injected

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 793
electron-hole pairs An by
hh
Eye = Eo + (30?)?/8 — (An)?/8 (18.1-12a)
2те
h2
Ер, = Е, — (3n?)?/8 — (An)?, (18.1-12b)
2My
so that
h2
Exe — Е = Е, + (8n*)*/8 —(An)*”*, (18.1-12c)
Mr
where An > no, ро. Under these conditions all An electrons occupy the lowest allowed energy
levels in the conduction band, and all Ap holes occupy the highest allowed levels in the valence
band. Compare with the results of Exercise 17.1-3.

(b) Sketch the functions f.(v) and r,,(v) for two values of An. Given the effect of temperature
on the Fermi functions, as illustrated in Fig. 18.1-3(b), determine the effect of increasing the
temperature оп r,p(v).

E
E
E fe °
‘wy’ wo vw в
f к. о
< ° f(E)
ЛХЕ)
—^ —
К К
(а) (6)

Figure 18.1-3 Energy bands and Fermi functions for a semiconductor in quasi-equilibrium (a) at

Т = 0° К, and (6) at T > 0° К.

EXERCISE 18.1-2

Spectral Intensity of Injection Electroluminescence under Weak Injection. For suffi-

ciently weak injection, such that Е. — Ey, >> kT and Ey, — E, > kT, the Fermi functions may be

approximated by their exponential tails. Show that the luminescence rate can then be expressed as

hv — E,
rsp(V) = Dy/hv — Е, exp 7 ee i hv > Ey, (18.1-13a)
where
(2m,.)°/? Ere — Е» — Ey

D=—— ——#§§___= 18.1-13b
Th? T, exP kT ( )
is an exponentially increasing function of the separation between the quasi-Fermi levels Ey, — Еуь.

The spectral intensity of the spontaneous emission rate is shown in Fig. 18.1-4; it has precisely the

same shape as the thermal-equilibrium spectral intensity shown in Fig. 17.2-8, but its magnitude is

increased by the factor D/Do = ехр[(Е;. — Efv)/kT], which can be very large in the presence of

794 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
injection. In thermal equilibrium Ey, = Е f,, so that (17.2-21) and (17.2-22) are recovered.
spl и)
Figure 18.1-4 Spectral intensity of the di-
rect interband injection-electroluminescence rate
rsp(v) (photons per second per Hz рег cm?),
versus Ри, from (18.1-13), under conditions of
Е weak injection.
E, hv
EXERCISE 18.1-3
Electroluminescence Spectral Linewidth.
(a) Show that the spectral intensity of the emitted light described by (18.1-13) attains its peak value
at a frequency и, determined by
Вы, = Е, + kT. (18.1-14)
Peak Frequency
(b) Show that the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the electroluminescence spectral intensity
15
Ди = 1.8 КТ/В. (18.1-15)
Spectral Width (Hz)
The value of Av for active materials made of compound semiconductors can be larger than that
specified in (18.1-15) by virtue of randomness in the chemical composition; this phenomenon is
known as alloy broadening.
(с) Show that this width corresponds to а wavelength spread АЛ = 1.8 №2 КТ /he, where A, = с/иь.

For КТ expressed in eV and the wavelength expressed in т, demonstrate that

AX = 1.45 № КТ. (18.1-16)
(4) Calculate Av and АЛ at T = 300° К, for A, = 0.8 ит and A, = 1.6 ит.
a
B. LED Characteristics
As is clear from the foregoing discussion, the simultaneous availability of electrons
and holes substantially enhances the flux of spontaneously emitted photons from a
semiconductor. Electrons are abundant in n-type material, and holes are abundant
in p-type material, but the generation of copious amounts of light requires that both
electrons and holes be plentiful in the same region of space. This condition may be
readily achieved in the junction region of a forward-biased p—n diode (Sec. 17.1E). As
shown in Fig. 18.1-5, forward biasing causes holes from the p side and electrons from
the n side to be forced into the common junction region by the process of minority
carrier injection, where they recombine and emit photons.

The light-emitting diode (LED) is a forward-biased p—n junction with a large ra-
diative recombination rate arising from injected minority carriers. The semiconductor
material is usually direct-bandgap to ensure high quantum efficiency. In this section
we determine the output power, as well as the spectral and spatial distributions of the
light emitted from an LED, and derive expressions for the efficiency, responsivity, and
response time.

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 795
+V о Figure 18.1-5 Energy-band dia-
gram of a heavily doped p—n junction
that is strongly forward biased by an
applied voltage V (compare with the
less strongly forward-biased energy-
band diagram in Fig. 17.1-21). The
5 dashed lines represent the quasi-Fermi
5 о 71° Ею levels, which are separated as a result
В семь [м hv eV of the bias. The simultaneous abun-
Е E,.— ОНА SE — - 4 dance of electrons and holes within
we ft the junction region results in strong
electron-hole radiative recombination
(injection electroluminescence).
Position
Internal Photon Flux and Internal Efficiency
A schematic representation of a simple p—n homojunction diode is provided in
Fig. 18.1-6. An injected DC current 7 leads to an increase in the steady-state carrier
concentrations An, which in turn result in radiative recombination in the active-region
volume У.
|
"||
| Figure 18.1-6 А simple forward-biased
+ Oo LED. The photons are emitted spontaneously
from the junction region.
—
27
Since the total number of carriers per second passing through the junction region is
i/e, where e is the magnitude of the electronic charge, the carrier injection (pumping)
rate (carriers per second рег cm®) is simply
i/e
R=—. 18.1-17
у ( )
Equation (18.1-1) provides that An = Ат, which results in a steady-state carrier
concentration
1/е)т
An = (/е)т . 18.1-18
у ( )
In accordance with (18.1-2), the internal photon flux Ф is then 7. АУ, which, using
(18.1-17), gives
a
=n; -. (18.1-19)
е Internal Photon Flux
This simple and intuitively appealing formula governs the production of photons by
electrons in an LED: a fraction 77; of the injected electron flux 7/e (electrons per second)

796 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
is converted into photon flux. The internal quantum efficiency 77; is therefore simply
the ratio of the generated photon flux to the injected electron flux.

The internal photon flux can be enhanced by making use of LEDs with double-
heterostructure configurations (Sec. 17.1F), and, in particular, multiquantum-well
(MQW) active regions (Sec. 17.1G). The benefit obtains because double heterostruc-
tures engender higher carrier concentrations, which enhances radiative recombination
(the radiative lifetime 7, is reduced) and thereby increases the internal quantum effi-
ciency 7; [see (17.1-30), (17.1-31), and (18.1-19)]. To maximize 7,, the heterostructure
confinement layers should be lattice matched to the active region.

Narrow quantum wells confine carriers even more tightly, further enhancing 77;. The
number of quantum wells used in a device is frequently limited because of difficulties
in populating all of them. To achieve good performance, it is important to make use of
materials of the highest quality, which minimizes defect concentrations, and to avoid
the presence of surfaces to which both carrier types have access, which minimizes
nonradiative recombination.

Yet another approach for increasing 7; relies on making use of a plasmonic LED,
in which metallic nanoparticles are embedded in a layer adjacent to a MQW active
region. This engenders coupling between localized surface plasmons (LSPs) of the
metallic nanoparticles (Sec. 8.2C), or of collective plasmonic resonances in periodic
nanostructure arrays, and the light emitted from the proximate MQWSs. The result can
be a substantial enhancement of the spontaneous-emission rate г.р(и) via the Purcell
effect (Sec. 14.3E), which in turn leads to an increase in the internal quantum efficiency
7. The usefulness of this approach is evident in increased LED output power, including
for devices that operate in the green. The polarization and directionality of the emitted
light are also modified.

Extraction Efficiency

The photon flux generated in the junction is radiated uniformly in all directions; how-
ever, the flux that emerges from the device depends on the direction of emission. This is
readily illustrated by considering the photon flux transmitted through a planar material
along three possible ray directions, denoted A, B, and C in the geometry of Fig. 18.1-7:

FT
Figure 18.1-7 Not all light generated in an
0, А LED with a planar surface is able to emerge.
ха Ray A is partly reflected. Ray В suffers more
№ | reflection. Ray С’ lies outside the critical
angle and therefore undergoes total internal
йе B reflection, so that it is trapped in the structure.

= The photon flux traveling in the direction of ray A is attenuated by the factor
71 = exp(—al,), (18.1-20)
where a is the absorption coefficient of the n-type material and [1 is the distance
from the junction to the surface of the device. Furthermore, for normal incidence,
reflection at the semiconductor—air boundary permits only a fraction of the light,
(n—1)? An

72 =1 (ntl). (n+D2’ (18.1-21)

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 797
to be transmitted, where n is the refractive index of the semiconductor material
[see Fresnel’s equations (6.2-15)]. For GaAs, п = 3.6, so that р» = 0.68. The
overall transmittance for the photon flux traveling in the direction of ray A is
therefore 74 = 77172.

= The photon flux traveling in the direction of ray B has farther to travel and
therefore suffers a larger absorption; it also has greater reflection losses. Thus,
NB < ПА:

= The photon flux emitted along directions lying outside a cone of (critical) angle
0. = sin~'(1/n), such as illustrated by ray C, suffers total internal reflection in
an ideal material and is not transmitted [see (1.2-5)]. The area of the spherical cap
atop this cone is A = for 2rr sin 9т 40 = 2rr?(1 — cos 0.) while the area of the
entire sphere is 4лт?. Thus, the fraction of the emitted light that lies within the
solid angle subtended by this cone is A/47r?, so that

ns = 3(1—cos@,) = 1 (1 _/i- 1/n? ) = 1/4n?. (18.1-22)

For a material with refractive index n = 3.6, as an example, only 1.9% of the
total generated photon flux can be transmitted. For a parallelepiped of refractive
index п > \/2, the ratio of isotropically radiated light energy that can emerge, to
the total generated light energy, is 3[1 — ,/1 — 1/n? ], as shown in Exercise 1.2-
6. However, some fraction of the photons emitted outside the critical angle can
be absorbed and reemitted within this angle, so that in practice, 73 may assume
a value larger than that specified by (18.1-22). Loss and Fresnel reflection must
also be incorporated for these rays.

The efficiency with which the internal photons can be extracted from the LED structure

is known as the extraction efficiency 7.. Antireflection coatings (Exercise 7.1-1) can

be used to reduce Fresnel reflection and thereby increase 7е.

НИ

EXERCISE 18.1-4

Extraction of Light from а Planar-Surface LED.

(a) Derive (18.1-22).

(b) Determine the critical angles for light escaping into air from: GaAs (n = 3.6), GaN (n = 2.5),
and a transparent polymer (n = 1.5). Calculate the fraction of light that can be extracted in the
three cases if absorption and Fresnel reflection are ignored.

(c) What is the enhancement in the fraction of extracted light that can be achieved if a planar GaAs
LED is coated with a transparent polymer of refractive index n = 1.5, assuming that absorption
and Fresnel reflection at the semiconductor-polymer boundary are ignored?

(d) Determine whether it might be useful to employ a material of intermediate refractive index (e.g.,
a polymer layer) to maximize the fraction of light emitted from the LED into air, if absorption is
ignored but Fresnel reflection at both the semiconductor—polymer and polymer—air interfaces is
accommodated.

ee

The extraction efficiency can be enhanced in a multitude of ways. One approach
involves selecting a geometry for the LED die (LED chip) that allows a greater frac-
tion of the light to escape. A spherical dome surrounding a point source at its center,
for example, permits all rays to escape, although they remain subject to Fresnel reflec-
tion. As illustrated in Fig. 18.1-8, several other geometries offer enhanced extraction

798 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

efficiencies in comparison with the parallelepiped: hemispherical domes, cylindrical
structures (which have an escape ring along the perimeter in addition to the escape cone
toward the top surface), inverted cones, and truncated inverted pyramids. However,
geometries that entail complex processing steps are often avoided in practice because
of increased manufacturing costs. Simple planar-surface-emitting LEDs are suitable
when the intended viewing angle deviates little from the normal or when the light is
coupled into an optical fiber, as it is in telecommunications applications.

Figure 18.1-8 LED-die geometries that offer enhanced extraction efficiencies relative to the
parallelepiped.

Another approach is to roughen the planar surface, which enhances the extraction
efficiency by permitting rays beyond the critical angle to escape via scattering, as
illustrated in Fig. 18.1-9. Indeed, an irregular surface appears automatically under
certain growth conditions. Alternatively, the emission surface can be textured, such
as with an array of microscopic cones or pyramids, or with nanoparticles.

ALES
1
4 Figure 18.1-9 An LED with a roughened
5 lanar surface permits rays beyond the crit-
Е ical angle to escape, thereby increasing the
»_ extraction efficiency пе.
The morphology of the light-emitting organs of some biological organisms, such as
fireflies, serves to enhance light extraction by reducing refractive-index mismatch and
total internal reflection. Bioinspired surface patterning has been successfully used to
increase the extraction efficiency of LEDs.

Top-emitting LEDs often make use of current-spreading layers (also referred to as
window layers), which are transparent conductive semiconductor layers that spread
the region of light emission beyond that surrounding the electrical contact. Current-
blocking layers, which prevent current from entering the active region below the top
contact, can also be used to control the light emission. The contact geometry can be
designed to maximize light transmission.

A whole host of other techniques are also used to enhance the extraction efficiency.
These include the use of distributed Bragg reflectors (see Sec. 7.1C) between the active
layer and an absorbing substrate to reflect the light back toward the desired direction
of emission, and reflective and transparent contacts. Another favored approach is the
use of a transparent substrate in conjunction with flip-chip packaging, which allows
the light to be extracted through the substrate rather than through the top surface of
the device. The LED extraction efficiency can also be enhanced by guiding light to the
surface of the device via a 2D photonic crystal (Sec. 7.3A), such as a regular array of
100-250-nm diameter holes formed in the current-spreading layer.

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 799

Spatial Pattern of Emitted Light
The far-field radiation pattern for light emitted into air from a planar surface-emitting
LED is similar to that of a Lambertian radiator. The intensity varies as cos 0, where 0
is the angle from the emission-plane normal; the intensity decreases to half its value at
9 = 60°. This pattern arises as a result of Snell’s law: light rays bend away from the
normal as they exit the semiconductor—air interface.

© Figure 18.1-10 Polymer-encapsulated LED in а 5-mm-

man diameter dual in-line package (DIP). Encapsulation protects the

= 3 ay LED chip (die), increases light extraction by reducing refractive-

AC index mismatch, and serves as a lens to shape the beam.

LEDs are often encapsulated in transparent polymer lens domes such as epoxy or
silicone for a number of reasons (Fig. 18.1-10). Lenses of different shapes alter the
emission pattern in different ways, as illustrated schematically for hemispherical and
parabolic lenses in Fig. 18.1-11. Polymer lenses can also enhance the extraction effi-
ciency 7-. A lens with a refractive index close to that of the semiconductor optimizes
the extraction of light from the semiconductor into the polymer. The shape of the
lens can then be tailored so as to maximize the extraction of light at the polymer—
air interface. Polymer materials usually have refractive indices that are intermediate
between those of semiconductors and air and, in practice, yield an enhancement in
light extraction by a factor of 2 to 3. Molded acrylic or polycarbonate collimators that
make use of total internal reflection in conjunction with refraction are often used to
provide parallel light rays for LED lighting applications, as illustrated in Fig. 1.2-14.

Junction Junction

(i Junction

(a) (b) (c)

Figure 18.1-11 Radiation patterns of surface-emitting LEDs: (a) Lambertian spatial pattern in the
absence of a lens; (6) spatial pattern with a hemispherical lens; (с) spatial pattern with a parabolic
lens.
The radiation pattern from edge-emitting LEDs and laser diodes is usually quite narrow
and can often be empirically described by the function cos* 9, with s > 1. If = 10,
for example, the intensity decreases to half its value at 0 = 21°.
Output Photon Flux and External Quantum Efficiency
The output photon flux ®, (also called the external photon flux) is related to the
internal photon flux by
р

Фо = NeP = Те, (18.1-23)
where the internal efficiency 7; relates the internal photon flux to the injected electron
flux, and the extraction efficiency 7, specifies how much of the internal photon flux is

800 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
transmitted out of the structure. A single quantum efficiency that accommodates both
of these processes is the external quantum efficiency (EQE) 7.x:
External Efficiency
The output photon flux in (18.1-23) can therefore be written as
4
Фо = Nex = (18.1-25)
External Photon Flux
so that the external efficiency 7х is simply the ratio of the external photon flux ®, to
the injected electron flux 7/e. Because the pumping rate generally varies locally within
the junction region, so too does the generated photon flux. The LED output optical
power P, is directly related to the output photon flux since each photon has energy hv:
P, = hv®, = hex hv. (18.1-26)
€ Output Power
The internal efficiency 7; for LEDs ranges between 50% and nearly 100%, while
the extraction efficiency 7. for properly designed devices can extend up to 50%. The
external efficiency 1.x of LEDs is thus typically below 50%.

As discussed in Sec. 16.2A, another measure of performance is the wall-plug ef-
ficiency (also called the power-conversion efficiency or overall efficiency), which
is defined at the ratio of the emitted optical power P, to the applied electrical power
Po = iV, р 1

о и
Пе = ду = Mex oy › (18.1-27)
where У is the voltage drop across the device. For hy = eV, as is the case for some
commonly encountered LEDs, we obtain 7. © пех.
Resonant-cavity LEDs. The quantum efficiencies 7, and 7. may be enhanced by
making use of a resonant-cavity light-emitting diode (RCLED). A pair of mirrors
(e.g., distributed Bragg reflectors) is used to confine injection electroluminescence to
a wavelength-sized, resonant microcavity in one dimension (Secs. 11.1B and 11.4).
RCLEDs exhibit a number of attractive features: 1) the spontaneous-emission rate
is enhanced by the Purcell effect (Sec. 14.3E), which results in an increase in the
internal quantum efficiency 7;; 2) the spectral width of the emitted light is reduced
below КТ when the cavity resonance is narrower than the spectral-intensity profile;
3) the temperature stability is then also enhanced because the cavity is less sensitive to
temperature changes than is the semiconductor energy gap; and 4) the emission is more
narrowly confined in angle, which results in an increase in the extraction efficiency
ye. AS illustrated in Fig. 18.1-12, a substantial fraction of the light is emitted into a
resonant mode whose angular extent falls principally within the extraction cone.

A photonic-crystal structure can also be incorporated in an RCLED to guide much
of the residual light toward the surface of the device, thereby further increasing 7..
The increased values of 7; and уе for RCLEDs lead directly to enhanced values of the
external and wall-plug efficiencies nex = nen and Ne = Nex(hv/eV), respectively.

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 801
Extraction Figure 18.1-12 А plane-parallel-reflector
|] yore resonant-cavity light-emitting diode (RCLED).
ceo Two closely spaced reflectors (the one at left
ya) with a reflectance near 100% and the one at
as . Modified right with a reflectance of, say, 50%) form a
emission wavelength-size cavity in one dimension that
| — confines the light and funnels a large portion
of it into a spatial region that lies within the
extraction cone.
However, RCLEDs are inherently low power devices by virtue of the small sizes of
their active regions. The use of microresonators for enhancing the properties of photon
sources is discussed further in Sec. 18.5.
Responsivity
The responsivity R of an LED is defined as the ratio of the emitted optical power P, to
the injected current i, 1.е., R = P,/7. Using (18.1-26), we obtain
pa fe №, (18.1-28)
a a е
The responsivity in W/A, when A, is expressed in jum, is then
R= New . (18.1-29)
Xo LED Responsivity
(W/A; A, in um)
For example, if A, = 1.24 ит, then В = 7x W/A; if Nex were unity, the maximum
optical power that could be produced by an injection current of 1 mA would be 1 mW.
Thus, for 7х = 1/2 at A, = 1.24 um, we have К = 1/2 mW/mA.

In accordance with (18.1-26), the LED output power P, is proportional to the in-
jected current 1. In practice, however, this relationship is valid only over a restricted
range. For the particular device whose light-current (L-i) curve is shown in Fig. 18.1-
13, the emitted optical power is proportional to the injection (drive) current only when
the latter is less than about 20 mA. In this range, the responsivity has a constant value
of about 0.3 mW/mA, as determined from the slope of the curve. For larger drive
currents, saturation causes the proportionality to fail; the responsivity then declines
with increasing drive current. Since Ло = 0.420 wm for this LED, (18.1-29) reveals
that it has an external quantum efficiency (EQE) пех = 0.10.

ae
97 10
Py Figure 18.1-13 Optical power at the out-
5 8 put of an LED versus injection (drive) cur-
=б rent. This MQW InGaN/GaN LED emits in
= the violet region of the spectrum at A, =
= 4 420 nm; the device structure is exhibited in
Ё 2 Fig. 18.1-21.
о

00—20 9 8 10

Drive current i (mA)

802 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

Spectral Distribution

The spectral intensity г.р(и) of light spontaneously emitted from a semiconductor in
quasi-equilibrium has been determined, as a function of the concentration of injected
carriers An, in Exercises 18.1-2 and 18.1-3. This theory is applicable to the electro-
luminescence light emitted from an LED in which quasi-equilibrium conditions are
established by injecting current into a p—n junction.

Under conditions of weak pumping, such that the quasi-Fermi levels lie within the
bandgap and are at least a few КТ away from the band edges, the spectral intensity
achieves its peak value at the frequency и» = (Е, + kT/2)/h (Exercise 18.1-3). In
accordance with (18.1-15) and (18.1-16), the FWHM of the spectral intensity is Av ~
1.8kT/h, which is independent of и, and Av = 10 THz for T = 300° К. When
expressed in terms of wavelength, however, the width does depend on А,

Spectral Width (ит)
where kT is specified in eV, the wavelength is specified in zm, and A, = с/м,.
The dependence of AX on № is apparent in Fig. 18.1-14, which illustrates the
observed wavelength spectral intensities for selected LEDs operating in the ultraviolet
(indicated as magenta) and visible regions of the spectrum. AIN has the largest Ш-
nitride energy bandgap, producing light at 210 nm; AlGaN is typically employed in the
mid and near ultraviolet; InGaN is the material of choice in the violet, blue, and green;
and AlInGaP usually serves the yellow, orange, and red. Typical spectral intensities
for LEDs that operate in the near infrared are displayed in Fig. P18.1-5; these devices
are generally fabricated from InGaAsP. The spectral width increases roughly as Л,
in accordance with (18.1-30). If Ap = 1 ит а  Т = 300° К, for example, (18.1-30)
provides АЛ = 36 nm. However, alloy broadening can result in a further increase in
the spectral width, as is evident in the spectrum for the green LED in Fig. 18.1-14.
Figure 18.1-14 Spectral inten-
sities versus wavelength for LEDs
that operate in the ultraviolet and
visible regions of the spectrum.
The peak intensities are all normal-
ized to the same value. Results for
LEDs operating in the infrared are
12 presented in Fig. Р18.1-5.
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
Wavelength Л, (4m)

Response Time

The response time of LEDs used for illumination is usually limited by the RC time

constant of the device because the junction area, and therefore the capacitance, is

large. The response time of communication-system LEDs, in contrast, is generally

limited principally by the lifetime 7 of the injected minority carriers that are respon-

sible for radiative recombination. For а sufficiently small injection rate А, the injec-

tion/recombination process can be described by a first-order linear differential equation

(Sec. 17.1D), and therefore by the response to sinusoidal signals. An experimental

determination of the highest frequency at which an LED can be effectively modulated

is easily obtained by measuring the output light power in response to sinusoidal electric

18.1. LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 803
currents of different frequencies. If the injected current assumes the form 7 = tg +
i, cos(Qt), where i; is sufficiently small so that the emitted optical power P varies
linearly with the injected current, the emitted optical power behaves as Р = Ро +
P; cos(Qt + ф).
The associated transfer function, which is defined as H(Q) = (P1/i1) exp(jy),
assumes the form R
H(Q) = ———— 18.1-31
тя: (18.1-31)
which is characteristic of a resistor—capacitor circuit. The rise time of the LED is 7 ($)
and its 3-dB bandwidth is B = 1/277 (Hz). A larger bandwidth B is therefore attained
by decreasing the rise time 7, which comprises contributions from both the radiative
lifetime т; and the nonradiative lifetime 7, through the relation 1/7 = 1/7, + 1/Tur.
However, reducing ту, results in an undesirable reduction of the internal quantum
efficiency 77; = 7/7;. It may therefore be desirable to maximize the internal quantum
efficiency-bandwidth product 7;B = 1/277, rather than the bandwidth alone. This
requires a reduction of only the radiative lifetime 7,, without a reduction of T,, which
may be achieved by careful choice of the semiconductor material and doping level.
Typical rise times of LEDs are in the range | to 50 ns, corresponding to bandwidths of
hundreds of MHz.
Electronic Circuitry
An LED is usually driven by a current source, as illustrated schematically in Fig.
18.1-15(a), most simply implemented by means of a constant-voltage source in series
with a resistor, as shown in Fig. 18.1-15(6). The emitted light is readily modulated by
simply modulating the injected current. Analog and digital modulation are portrayed
in Figs. 18.1-15(c) and 18.1-15(d), respectively. The performance of LED drivers may
be improved by adding circuitry that regulates bias current, matches impedance, and
provides nonlinear compensation to limit the maximum current. Fluctuations in the
intensity of the emitted light may be stabilized by monitoring it with a photodetector,
whose output is used as a feedback signal to control the injected current.
+
+
we wy
wn
Inga! outa
signal nable
(a) (b) (c) (4)
Figure 18.1-15 Various circuits can be used as LED drivers. These include (a) an ideal DC current
source; (b) a DC current source provided by a constant-voltage source in series with a resistor; (c)
transistor control of the current injected into the LED to provide analog modulation of the emitted
light; and (d) transistor switching of the current injected into the LED to provide digital modulation
of the emitted light.
C. Materials and Device Structures
Photonics was revolutionized in the 1950s by the growth of single-crystal binary Ш-У
semiconductors, compounds that do not occur in nature. Many of these alloys have
direct bandgaps and therefore exhibit large values of the internal quantum efficiency.

804 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Photon sources fabricated from Ш-У materials also offer long lifetimes, unlike those
that make use of II-VI alloys. GaAs was the first such material to be fabricated in the
form of LEDs and LDs (see p. 787). Today’s LED industry is almost exclusively built
around ternary and quaternary III—V material systems, particularly InGaAsP, AlIlnGaP,
and AlInGaN (Fig. 18.1-16)
105 3 2 15 1.00.90.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 № (ит)
Al, In, Ga,_,_,N
WN an
inN [I
In,_,Ga, As,_, P,
InAs П | GaP
РЕ ПАР
InP GaP
GaAs| GaP
GaAs AlAs
InAs GaAs
GaSb GaAs
|Ge |si
0 0.5 10 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 E, (eV)
Figure 18.1-16 Bandgap wavelength Л., and corresponding bandgap energy Е’, for selected
elemental and Ш-У binary, ternary, and quaternary semiconductors. Successive rows, starting at the
top, represent AlInGaN, AlGaN, InGaN, InGaAsP, AlInGaP, InGaP, GaAsP, AlGaAs, InGaAs, and
GaAsSb. The shaded regions indicate direct-bandgap compositions.
These Ш-У materials allow high-brightness light to be generated over a spectral range
that stretches from the infrared to the ultraviolet, as exemplified by Figs. 18.1-14, 18.1-
17, and P18.1-5.
:, ae Figure 18.1-17 LED traffic signal based
eee on Ш-У materials.

LEDs may be constructed either in surface-emitting or edge-emitting geometries
(Fig. 18.1-18). The surface-emitting LED emits light from a face of the device that is
parallel to the plane of the active region. The edge-emitting LED, in contrast, emits
light from the edge of the active region.

(a) В (b) af
Figure 18.1-18 (a) Surface-emitting LED. (5) Edge-emitting LED.

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 805

We proceed to provide brief descriptions of the principal Ш-У semiconductor com-
pounds used to fabricate LEDs, along with schematic illustrations of several repre-
sentative device structures. These compounds are also used to fabricate semiconduc-
tor optical amplifiers, laser diodes, quantum-confined lasers, microcavity lasers, and
nanocavity lasers, as considered in Secs. 18.2—18.6, respectively. Along the way, we
highlight a number of applications for LEDs and LDs in the IR, visible, and UV.
GaAs. The first Ш-У material to play an important role in photonics was GaAs. This
direct-bandgap, binary semiconductor was used to fabricate the first practical LED in
1961, with a peak emission wavelength at 0.890 jm (near the bandgap wavelength of
GaAs at Л, = 0.873 um). Not long thereafter, several other direct-bandgap, binary
Ш-У semiconductors, grown by vapor-phase epitaxy (VPE) and liquid-phase epitaxy
(LPE), were also shown to exhibit electroluminescence near their bandgap wavelengths
(as provided in Table 17.1-2): GaSb (A, = 1.70 pum), InP (A, = 0.919 ип), InAs
(Ag = 3.44 рт), and InSb (Лу = 7.29 jum).
GaAsP. Increasing the mole-fraction of phosphorus in the ternary semiconductor
СаАз1_„Р. causes the bandgap wavelength to move into the visible region of the
spectrum, offering emission in the red (Fig. 18.1-16). Though the nature of the bandgap
ultimately changes from direct to indirect as the bandgap wavelength decreases fur-
ther, emission in the orange, yellow, and green can nevertheless be achieved by using
nitrogen-doped versions of these materials (GaAsP:N and GaP:N). The nitrogen impu-
rities (zinc and oxygen co-dopants can also be used) are incorporated into the material
at sharply localized positions so that they can accommodate the substantial momentum
changes associated with indirect transitions. However, the external quantum efficien-
cies of such LEDs are typically < 1%, in part because of a lattice-constant mismatch
with the GaAs substrate. Nevertheless, LEDs made of GaAs, GaAsP, GaAsP:N, and
GaP:N are inexpensive to fabricate and continue to be used in low-brightness applica-
tions such as indicator lamps and remote controls for consumer appliances.
InGaAs. Adding indium to GaAs has the opposite effect of adding phosphorus; it
serves to increase the bandgap wavelength, allowing it to extend all the way to the
value for InAs. The ternary semiconductor In,Ga,_,As is a direct-bandgap material
that can be lattice matched to an InP substrate. Its bandgap is compositionally tunable
over the near infrared and a portion of the mid infrared: 0.873 4m (GaAs) < A, < 3.44
ит (InAs) (Fig. 18.1-16). LEDs fabricated from In,Ga,_,As are used in consumer
applications. Strained-layer InGaAs laser-diode arrays are used to pump Yb?*-doped
DPSS and silica-fiber lasers at \, = 940 nm as well as Er®*: silica-fiber lasers and
amplifiers at Л. = 980 nm (Secs. 16.3A and 16.3B). InGaAs laser-diode arrays are also
used for the in-band pumping of Nd?+:YVO, DPSS lasers at 914 nm (Sec. 16.3A). In
the domain of photodetectors, InGaAs is widely used in the fabrication of PIN detectors
and avalanche photodiodes for use in optical fiber communication systems that operate
in the 1.3—1.6-j4m telecommunications band (Example 19.4-2 and Sec. 25.1).
InGaAsP. The quaternary In,_,Ga,As;_,P, is a versatile alloy that is widely used
in the near-infrared region of the spectrum. Its bandgap is compositionally tunable
over a substantial range of wavelengths [0.549 ит (GaP) < Лу < 3.44 ит (InAs)],
and lattice matching to an InP substrate can be maintained if the compositional mixing
ratios т and у are judiciously chosen [stippled area in Fig. 17.1-7(a)]. Only a portion
of this range enjoys the benefit of a direct bandgap, however (Fig. 18.1-16). InGaAsP
laser-diode arrays are used for the in-band pumping of Er**:silica-fiber amplifiers and
lasers at 1480 nm (Secs. 15.3C and 16.3B).

806 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Applications of IR LEDs and LDs. InGaAsP can be used to fabricate LEDs
for short-haul, modest-bit-rate communication systems operating near Ло = 1330 nm
(Fig. 18.1-19). Long-haul, high-bit-rate communication systems generally operate in
the vicinity of Л, = 1550 nm and make use of laser diodes rather than LEDs since
it is easier to couple the collimated light emitted by an LD into a single-mode fiber
(Sec. 25.1B).
InGaAsP InP
active region substrate
Figure 18.1-19 Saul—Lee—Burrus-type surface-
emitting InGaAsP LED for use in an optical fiber
communication system operating at a wavelength
+ | of 1.3 мт. The active region is lattice matched to
the InP substrate. The device is mounted upside
Dielectric down in the package (flip-chip packaging) so the
film light emerges through the substrate. An integrated
- lens collimates the light for enhanced coupling to
a fiber.
InGaAsP
contact InP
layer confinement
layers
InGaAsSb. The bandgap wavelength may be further increased by replacing the P in
InGaAsP with Sb, yielding the quaternary semiconductor Inj_,Ga,As,_,Sb,. Using
a GaSb substrate, this compositionally tunable alloy can be used to fabricate devices
such as quantum-well lasers that operate in the mid-infrared region (2 < A, < 4 wm).
However, Ш-апйтотшае sources have largely been replaced by mid-infrared quantum
cascade lasers (Sec. 18.4D), which generally offer superior performance.
AlGaAs. Just as adding phosphorus to GaAs increases its bandgap energy, so too
does the addition of aluminum. Like СаАз1_„Р., the ternary alloy Al,Ga;_,As can
be compositionally tuned in the red and near infrared (AlGaAs has a direct bandgap in
the wavelength range 630 < A, < 900 nm, as is evident from Fig. 18.1-16). Unlike
GaAsP, however, AlGaAs has the merit that lattice matching to GaAs is maintained
for all mole fractions of aluminum [Fig. 17.1-7(a)] so that the material can serve as а
high-brightness source in the red. However, since Al,,Ga;_,As/GaAs multiquantum-
well structures can be adversely affected by nonuniform carrier distributions in the
active region, LEDs are often fabricated using a double-heterostructure configuration
of the form Al,,Ga;_,As/Al,Ga,_,As, in which the compositions of the barriers and
wells differ. Collections of AlGaAs laser diodes emitting at 808 or 880 nm can be
arrayed in the form of bars or stacks to provide four-level and in-band pumping,
respectively, for Nd?+:YVO, and Nd*+:YAG solid-state lasers (Sec. 16.3A). Similarly,
AlGaAs laser stacks emitting at 888 nm provide in-band pumping for the enormously
powerful Nd**:glass laser amplifiers used in the HAPLS laser system (Example 23.2-
3). AlGaAs laser-diode arrays emitting at 793 nm are also used to pump Tm?" :silica-
fiber lasers (Sec. 16.3B).
AlInGaP. The quaternary semiconductor (Al,Ga,_,),Inj_,P is a direct-bandgap
material over a substantial range of the near infrared and the longer reaches of the
visible spectrum (Fig. 18.1-16). Lattice matching to GaAs is attained for composi-
tions in the range (Al,,Gaj_z)o.5Ing.5P. The quantum efficiency of AlInGaP LEDs is
enhanced by making use of multiquantum-well (MQW) active regions, wafer-bonded
transparent GaP substrates in place of GaAs, and resonant-cavity (RC) configurations
that offer decreased bandwidth and directed emission patterns.

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 807
Applications of visible LEDs. Under daylight conditions, human vision is max-
imally sensitive at 555 nm in the yellow-green region of the spectrum (Sec. 18.1F).
This makes AllnGaP the material of choice for high-brightness applications such as
traffic lights and signage, at least in the red, orange, yellow-orange (amber), and yellow
regions. AllnGaP/InGaP LEDs also find occasional use in plastic-fiber communication
systems that operate in the 650-nm wavelength region (Fig. 18.1-20). The lattice-
matched ternary compound Ing;Gao.5P, with a bandgap wavelength of 650 nm, is
widely used for red laser pointers.
AllnGaP /InGaP GaAs
active region YY contact layer
| Figure 18.1-20 Surface-emitting AlInGaP/InGaP
650-nm MQW RCLED for use in short-haul, plastic-
- — fiber communication systems. A top-emitting structure
is used because of the opacity of the GaAs substrate in
this device. The distributed Bragg reflectors comprise
AlAs/AIlGaAs layers with an aluminum content that is
sufficiently high so that the 650-nm light is transmit-
ted. A lens enhances coupling of the light to a fiber.
GaAs < AlInGaP
substrate AlAs /AlGaAs confinement
Bragg reflectors layers
GaN. Gallium nitride is a direct-bandgap, binary semiconductor with a bandgap
wavelength A, = 0.366 jm that falls in the near-ultraviolet region of the spectrum.
It may be grown by MBE, MOCVD, or HVPE. GaN is the progenitor of the important
ternary and quaternary compounds InGaN, AlGaN, and AlInGaN, much as GaAs was
the progenitor of InGaAs, AlGaAs, and InGaAsP. These materials are often grown
on sapphire or Si substrates, despite substantial lattice mismatch; unlike the arsenide
and phosphide Ш-У compounds, the Ш-п1ил4ез can tolerate large dislocation con-
centrations so that lattice mismatch is well-tolerated. Buffer layers can also be used to
accommodate differences in thermal-expansion coefficients. A better lattice match is
offered by SiC, which is sometimes used as a substrate.
InGaN. The ternary semiconductor In,,Ga,_,N is a direct-bandgap material with a
bandgap wavelength that spans the region 366 nm (GaN) < A, < 1.61 им (InN).
InGaN is the material of choice for high-brightness LEDs in the wavelength range
366 < A, < 580 nm, comprising the near-ultraviolet, violet, blue, and green re-
gions of the spectrum (Fig. 18.1-16). This Ш-пияде alloy is thus complementary
to AlInGaP, which best accommodates the red, orange, and yellow regions. As with
AlInGaP, the quantum efficiency is enhanced by making use of MQW structures such
as GaN/InGaN (Fig. 18.1-21). The substrate is often GaN on sapphire. However, the
number of quantum wells is generally limited because of population limits imposed by
the hole diffusion length; low and/or thin barriers are preferred. Performance can also
be enhanced by the use of resonant-cavity devices. Other configurations include arrays
of quantum dots that self-assemble on growth and arrays of nanorods.
AlGaN. A1,Ga,_,N is also a ternary Ш-пци4е direct-bandgap semiconductor, but
its bandgap wavelength falls in the range 206 nm (AIN) < Л, < 366 nm (GaN)
(Fig. 18.1-16), which covers the mid- and near-ultraviolet regions (200 < A, < 390
nm). LEDs comprising AlGaN/AIGaN heterostructures have been fabricated across
this wavelength region although achieving high efficiency is more challenging at

808 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

active region

layers о |<) (6) = © = ©) о о

+ —>
layers

Figure 18.1-21 Flip-chip packaged, surface-emitting GaN/InGaN MQW LED operating at Л, =
420 nm in the violet spectral region. The light is extracted through the GaN-on-sapphire transparent
substrate, which is textured with an array of tiny pyramids to increase the extraction efficiency. In the
structure illustrated, the active region comprises 5-nm GaN barriers and 2.5-nm In,,Ga,_,N wells.
these shorter wavelengths. As with InGaN, LED quantum efficiency is enhanced by
making use of double-heterostructure or MQW active regions with layers of the form
Al,Ga,_,N/Al,Gai_yN. High-quality AIN, or templates of AlGaN/AIN/sapphire,
serve as transparent lattice-matched substrates for ultraviolet AlGaN-based emitters.
AIN LEDs emitting at 210 nm have also been fabricated. By virtue of their large
bandgap and large thermal conductivity, Ш-пилае materials are also employed
in specialized electronic components such as transistors for high-power and high-
temperature applications.

Applications of UV LEDs. Ultraviolet LEDs operating in the UVA band (315 <
Ао < 400 nm) find use in applications such as printing, curing, and counterfeit de-
tection. Source emitting in the UVC band (100 < A, < 280 nm) are useful for
sterilization as well as germicidal and water-treatment applications. UV LEDs are
also employed for detecting chemical and biological agents (many of which fluoresce
at particular wavelengths when exposed to ultraviolet light) and for non-line-of-sight
covert communications.

AlInGaN. It is clear from the foregoing that the ternary Ш-пйа4е compounds
InGaN and AlGaN are suitable for fabricating sources that stretch across the visible
and ultraviolet regions of the spectrum. However, the quaternary semiconductor
(Al, InyGa,_z—y)N has the merit that it can be lattice matched to a GaN template for
certain values of x and у [Fig. 17.1-7(6)], thereby increasing the quantum efficiency
of the resulting devices. This lattice matching is analogous to that of AlInGaP
to GaAs and of InGaAsP to InP. AlInGaN LEDs with lattice matching to a GaN
substrate are useful over wavelengths ranging from 366 nm, the bandgap wavelength
of GaN, to Л, = 250 nm, the wavelength of AlInN that is lattice matched to GaN.
AlInGaN/InGaN/AlInGaN quantum-well structures serve as active-region materials
for devices. AlInGaN can also serve as a transparent contact layer.

D. Silicon Photonics

Silicon has long been the leading materials platform for integrated electronics, for
a whole host of reasons: it is 1) abundant and inexpensive; 2) readily grown in pure
form and in bulk; 3) easy to dope, oxidize, and manipulate; 4) stable at high tem-
peratures; and 5) compatible with CMOS technology. Its ubiquity, availability, and
properties have also made it an attractive platform for integrated photonics. The high
refractive-index contrast of silicon and its oxides allows strong optical confinement in

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 809
a compact volume. This, together with its transparency in the 1.3—1.6-j4m telecom-
munications band, and its CMOS compatibility, promotes its use for devices such as
high-performance optical waveguides, filters, splitters, multiplexers, demultiplexers,
and wavelength converters, as well as other components (Sec. 25.1E).

A notable exception to the adaptability of Si centers on its use as an active medium
for LEDs and laser diodes. The development of Si-based light sources has been ham-
pered by its indirect bandgap, which restricts its ability to generate light efficiently via
interband transitions (Fig. 17.2-7). Over the years, extensive efforts have been devoted
to surmounting this roadblock, either by mitigating the indirect nature of silicon’s
bandgap or by avoiding it altogether. Early efforts directed toward increasing the effi-
ciency of light emission involved the use of alternatives to its crystalline form, such as
porous silicon (in which nanopores pervade the diamond structure); silicon nanocrys-
tals, superlattices, and quantum dots (Example 17.2-2); and Er?*+-doped silicon-based
hosts and superlattices. None of these approaches has been particularly successful,
however. A more fruitful approach was to co-opt light-emitting interactions in silicon
other than those associated with interband transitions. In particular, the silicon Raman
laser relies on stimulated Raman scattering and is thus indifferent to the nature of the
bandgap (Example 16.3-4). Still, Raman devices require optical rather than electrical
pumping, which reduces their appeal for many applications. Yet, silicon Raman lasers
have been successfully integrated with direct-bandgap emitters such as InP that serve
as an optical pump.

Fortunately, substantial progress has been made in recent years in implementing
silicon-based on-chip light sources for use in photonic integrated circuits (PICs).
Three approaches are currently in use, each with its own limitations and merits:

1. Flip-chip integration (direct-mounting integration) of Ш-У laser diodes into a
separately fabricated silicon platform, often with optical butt coupling. This ap-
proach, which makes use of solder bumps, requires sub-micrometer-scale align-
ment precision and is not scalable to large wafer volumes or complex laser
designs, but it is straightforward.

2. Heterogeneous integration (hybrid approach) of I-V lasers into prepatterned
silicon circuits, typically via wafer bonding and with optical evanescent coupling
to evade lattice-matching limitations. This approach is incompatible with the
clean CMOS-foundry environment. However, it accommodates a whole host of
materials and can also relegate photon storage to the undoped silicon platform
(with its low loss and high Q) via hybrid modes, thereby facilitating the fabrica-
tion of narrow-linewidth, dense-comb, and mode-locked lasers.

3. Direct heteroepitaxial growth оЕ Ш-У lasers on Si substrates using intermediate
buffer layers to minimize dislocations in the light-emitting region. This approach
is encumbered with the large lattice-constant and thermal mismatches between Si
and Ш-У materials, which result in dislocations that reduce efficiency by acting
as nonradiative recombination centers. However, this can be largely counter-
balanced by employing quantum-dot, rather than quantum-well emitters, since:
1) quantum dots are less affected by the threading dislocations initiated by lat-
tice and thermal mismatches, and 2) quantum dots enjoy substantially reduced
sensitivity to temperature changes.

On balance, direct heteroepitaxy appears to be the most attractive alternative for large-
scale, low-cost, fabrication of silicon-based on-chip light sources.

It is worth noting that group-IV photonics also offers a route to the development of
on-chip light sources via combinations and alloys of indirect-bandgap semiconductors
such as Si, Ge, Sn, and C. Germanium-based structures are leading the way, although
considerable challenges remain (see, e.g., Example 17.2-1 and Sec. 18.5B). Interest-
ingly, the use of such materials is not new: the first LED, which dates to 1907, was a
forward-biased SiC Schottky diode.

810 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

E. Organic LEDs

OLEDs

Organic light-emitting diodes can be fabricated from small organic molecules or con-
jugated polymer chains (Sec. 17.1B). Small-molecule organic light-emitting diodes,
called OLEDs or SMOLEDs, are efficient generators of electroluminescence in the
blue, green, and red. A device is formed from two thin (~ 100-nm) organic semi-
conductor films that are juxtaposed to form an organic heterostructure. As shown in
Fig. 18.1-22(a), this structure is sandwiched between two inorganic electrodes, an
anode that injects holes and one or more cathodes that inject electrons. This contrasts
with the process of carrier injection in inorganic LEDs, which makes use of heavily
doped p- and n-type crystalline materials and strong forward bias.

The injected carriers are transported to the heterojunction (active region), forming
bound excitons that generate spontaneous emission upon recombination. Different het-
erostructure materials yield different recombination-radiation wavelengths, so several
heterostructures can be patterned on a single substrate to provide a multicolor OLED.
Such heterostructures can be fabricated in a side-by-side, or striped configuration,
forming a color-tunable horizontal stack as shown in Fig. 18.1-22(a). Alternatively,
they can be fabricated one atop the other, creating a vertical stack with a blue emitter on
top, a green emitter in the middle, and a red emitter on bottom, as shown in Fig. 18.1-
22(b). White organic light-emitting diodes (WOLEDs), which are the elements of
white OLED light panels, are usually fabricated using vertical stacks.

- - Cathode -

. Cathode 3 transport layer й transport layer

Anode Anode
substrate | | transport layer substrate | | transport layer
(a) (в)

Figure 18.1-22 OLED structures fabricated in the form of (а) a horizontal stack of blue,
green, and red emitters, which requires patterning but is color tunable, and (65) a vertical stack.
Calcium and indium tin oxide are commonly used as the cathode and transparent anode materials,
respectively. Exciton recombination radiation emitted at the organic heterojunctions exits through the
transparent anode and glass substrate. Organic semiconductors used to fabricate OLEDs include hole-
transporting ТРО (triphenyl diamine derivative) and electron-transporting А1аз [aluminum tris(8-
hydroxyquinoline)]. Luminescent dopants can be infused into the active regions to enhance the
internal quantum efficiency and to create white light. A white element is sometimes added to the
horizontal stack to facilitate color refinement.

The energy levels of bound excitons in organic materials resemble those of electrons
in dye molecules, comprising both singlet (S) and triplet (T) states, as schematized in
Fig. 14.1-8. The electron spin in a singlet state is antiparallel to that of the remainder
of the molecule, resulting in a total spin angular-momentum quantum number $ = 0
and spin multiplicity 25 + 1 = 1, as explained in Secs. 14.1A and 14.1C. The electron
spin in a triplet state, in contrast, is parallel to that of the remainder of the molecule,
which results in $ = 1 and 25 + 1 = 3. The spin multiplicity of the triplet state is thus
three times that of the singlet state, whence its appellation.

As explained in Sec. 14.5A, radiative transitions that take place between two states
of the same multiplicity ($ — $ or T > T) are spin-allowed, in which case the

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 811
luminescence process is known as fluorescence. Luminescence from spin-forbidden
transitions (e.g., T — S), in contrast, is called phosphorescence. The lifetimes of
phosphorescent transitions are usually far longer than those of fluorescent transitions
(e.g., Msec vs. nsec) because of the forbidden nature of the former. The ground states
of most organic compounds are singlet states so that the radiative decay of singlet
excitons is strongly favored.

However, triplet-exciton radiative recombination can be fostered by infusing the
active region of the device with fluorophores that bind to the organic molecules or
conjugated polymer chains comprising the heterostructure. Triplet excitons can then
efficiently transfer their energy to the fluorophore while concomitantly transferring
their spin angular momentum to the organic molecule or polymer to which the exciton
is bound. By virtue of the triplet-state multiplicity, this serves to increase the internal
quantum efficiency of the device by a factor of four. This approach also allows the
colors of the emitted light to be determined by the choice of fluorophores rather than
by the exciting excitons.

PLEDs

Polymer light-emitting diodes, called PLEDs or P-OLEDs, are similar in construc-
tion to OLEDs except that they typically have an n-type active region into which holes
are injected by a p-type organic layer. Light-emitting polymer materials (LEPs) that
comprise such devices are often derivatives of poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) and
polyfluorene. The color of the emitted light can be modified by substituting appropriate
side chains on the polymer backbone. PLEDs are less expensive to fabricate than
OLEDs and are readily printed, but they generally have lower efficiencies and shorter
life spans.

The desirable features of small-molecule and large-molecule polymeric organic
materials can be brought together in molecules known as phosphorescent dendrimers.
These are large molecular balls containing a heavy-metal ion core, such as Ir(2-
phenylpyridine)3, which facilitates triplet-exciton radiative recombination via зрш-
orbit coupling; layers of branching-ring structures are bonded around it. Alternatively,
high efficiencies can be attained by making use of efficient thermally activated
delayed fluorescence (TADF) emitters, which have an energy gap between their
singlet and triplet excited states (51 and Ту, respectively) that is sufficiently small so
that temperature fluctuations can drive transitions to the singlet state.

F. LED Lighting

Only about 5% of the optical power radiated by a typical incandescent lamp is emitted
in the form of visible light; the remaining 95% is emitted in the infrared as heat.
Light-emitting diodes, in contrast to incandescent and fluorescent sources, are efficient
and versatile, and have long operational lives. LED and OLED sources, discussed in
Secs. 18.1C and 18.1E, respectively, are widely used in residential, architectural, auto-
motive, and street lighting. The light emitted by LEDs can be dynamically controlled
and can assume an enormous palette of colors, including white, with excellent color
rendering quality. LED lighting is also called solid-state lighting.

The human visual system is constructed in such a way that the combination of light
from a small number of judiciously chosen LEDs, in spite of their narrow individual
spectral profiles, can nonetheless appear white to the observer. Such light, termed
metameric white light, can even be generated by a single LED when it is endowed
with a photoluminescent phosphor. As a prelude to considering the features of LED
lighting, it is useful to set forth some of the units and metrics used in the field. This is
followed by brief discussions of single-die (discrete) LEDs, white LEDs, array LEDs,
chip-on-board (COB) LEDs, retrofit LED lamps, and white OLED light panels.

812 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

Units and Metrics

In earlier chapters our attention was focused exclusively on radiometric units, which
characterize the strength of a light source in terms of its physical properties. Photomet-
ric units, on the other hand, characterize the effectiveness of a light source in terms of
its ability to excite the human visual system. Both radiometric and photometric units
are important in LED lighting. Examples of radiometric units are the radiant flux
P, also called the optical power (specified in W) and the irradiance J, commonly
called the intensity (specified in W/m?). The corresponding photometric units are,
respectively, the luminous flux P, (specified in lumens, which is abbreviated Im)
and the illuminance М, (specified in Im/m?, which is the same аз lux). Photometric
quantities often carry the subscript “у” to indicate their connection with vision.

The luminous flux P, is a measure of the brightness of a light source as perceived
by the eye. Dictated by historical considerations, the lumen is defined such that 683
Im corresponds to 1 W of optical power at 555 nm, the wavelength of maximum
human visual sensitivity under daylight conditions where photopic vision prevails.
The photopic luminosity function У (Ло), which has a value of unity at A, = 555
nm, specifies the relative sensitivity of the eye over the range of visible wavelengths,
which stretches from 380 to 780 nm.

The wall-plug luminous efficacy 7,, also called the overall luminous efficacy or
the luminous efficacy of the source, is the most widely used efficiency metric for
LED lighting devices. It is defined as the ratio of the luminous flux generated (1m) to
the electrical power provided to the device (W), and hence has units of lm/W:

My = P,/iV. (18.1-32)
The electrical power 7V is the product of the applied current and voltage. An LED that
optimally converts electrical power to visible light would exhibit a luminous efficacy
of 683 Im/W, a value that can be attained only if the device has a power-conversion
efficiency 7. = 1 [see (18.1-27)] and if it emits monochromatic yellow-green light at a
wavelength of 555 nm. Since metameric white light comprises a wavelength spectrum
broader than just a single component at 555 nm, and since the relative sensitivity of
the eye diminishes for wavelengths both below and above this value in accordance
with the photopic luminosity function, it is clear that a white LED is constrained
to provide 7, < 683 Im/W. Observed values of luminous efficacy for three distinct
lighting devices are provided for context: 1) a 100-W tungsten incandescent lamp
offers 7, & 15 Im/W; 2) an equivalent compact fluorescent lamp provides 7, = 70
Im/W; and 3) an equivalent commercially available white LED lamp yields n, = 120
Im/W, although white LED lamps with 7, > 300 Im/W have been reported.

The correlated color temperature (CCT) of a source is the temperature of a
blackbody radiator, as described in Sec. 14.4B, whose color most closely resembles
that of the source. As the temperature of a blackbody radiator transitions from low to
high, its color goes from deep red, to orange, to yellow, to yellowish-white, to white,
and ultimately to bluish-white at sufficiently high temperatures. Sources in the range
2700° < CCT S 3500° К (yellowish) are called “warm white,” while those in the
range 5000° < CCT < 7500° К (bluish-white) are referred to as “cool white.” The
value of the CCT ascribed to a source of light bears no connection to its thermodynamic
temperature.

Another important measure is the color rendering index (CRI), which indicates
how realistically a source can render colors. This metric, which is defined only for
sources that are approximately white, is calculated by measuring the light reflected
from a standardized sample set for various colors. The CRI assumes values between 0
and 100, with 100 considered ideal.

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 813
Salutary Features
LED lighting offers many salutary features in comparison with its incandescent and
fluorescent counterparts:
= Long operational life, slow failure, and low cost. LEDs have life spans that can
exceed 100000 hours, far longer than the 1500 hours for typical incandescent
sources and 10000 hours for compact fluorescent lamps; their failure is also grad-
ual rather than sudden. These features result in reduced long-term replacement
and maintenance costs.
= Low energy consumption. High values of the wall-plug luminous efficacy 7, indi-
cate that LEDs use far less electrical power than their incandescent and fluorescent
cousins to generate a given luminous flux. Because of this, LEDs can be powered
by solar panels.
= Broad choice of colors and high-quality color rendering. LEDs can generate light
with colors that span the gamut of human vision, including a continuum of whites.
They offer high values of the color rendering index (CRD), indicating that colored
objects appear natural under illumination.
= Dynamic and smart-networking capabilities. The colors, temporal irradiance pat-
terns, and spatial distributions of light produced by LEDs can be dynamically
programmed. The electronic drivers can also communicate wirelessly with each
other and with collections of sensors to provide smart networks.
Discrete LEDs
Individually, LEDs emit narrowband, colored light — the color is determined by the
bandgap wavelength of the material from which the LED is fabricated, as exemplified
in Fig. 18.1-14. The optical and electrical characteristics of some typical individual,
single-die LEDs of different colors are set forth in Table 18.1-1. Such devices are
commonly called discrete LEDs.
Table 18.1-1 Representative parameter values for 3-mm-diameter, discrete LEDs (blue, green,
and red): peak wavelength A, (nm), forward voltage У (V), forward current $ (A), electrical power
consumed iV (W), external quantum efficiency 7.x, power-conversion efficiency 7, output radiant
flux (optical power) P, (W), luminous flux P, (Im), and wall-plug luminous efficacy 7, (Im/W). The
quantities 7.x, 7, and P, are interrelated via (18.1-24), (18.1-26), and (18.1-27).
Color Ap V ae WV Nex Ne Р, Р, Ny
Blue 465 3.1 0.35 1.1 0.4 0.35 0.38 50 45
Green 528 3.2 0.35 1.1 0.3 0.22 0.25 125 115
Red 625 2.2 0.35 0.8 0.4 0.36 0.28 75 95
“ТирИпе the current to = 1 А results in an approximate doubling of the radiant flux P, and luminous flux P,, but
this comes at the expense of a reduction in the luminous efficacy ny.
White LEDs
White is by far the most important color for illumination. There are several methods
by means of which colored LED light can be converted into metameric white light.
The first method, widely used because of its simplicity and low cost, makes use of a
phosphor-conversion LED, which is an LED die coupled with one or more phosphors
that generate photoluminescence (Sec. 14.5B). In its simplest implementation, a vi-
olet LED and a yellow phosphor give rise to metameric white light (any two colors
whose combination results in white light are known as complementary colors). A red
phosphor can be added to the combination to yield warmer metameric white light and

814 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
quantum dots can be used in place of phosphors to increase efficiency. The second
method, known as additive color mixing, relies on superposing the light generated by
several LEDs of different colors — this approach has the merit of offering color-tunable
LED lighting. The third method, often referred to as the hybrid approach, makes use
of two or more LEDs of different colors (e.g., blue and red) in conjunction with one or
more phosphors. This method can offer favorable color-quality attributes at the expense
of increased complexity and cost. We proceed to examine the first and second methods
in turn.
Method 1: Phosphor-conversion LEDs (PC-LEDs). The evolution of the PC-LED
since the year 2000 is illustrated in Fig. 18.1-23. Early devices, such as that portrayed
in Fig. 18.1-23(а), made use of InGaN LED chips with a central emission wavelength
= 465 nm and a FWHM spectral width = 35 nm. Some of the blue LED light
that impinged on the Ce?*:YAG phosphor generated yellow photoluminescence light
with a spectral bandwidth = 500-700 nm that was relatively broad. The result was
metameric white light. A contemporary PC-LED, such as that shown in Fig. 18.1-
23(b), operates on the same principle, but takes the form of a surface-mounted device
(SMD), with its electrical contacts lateral to the housing; this offers greatly improved
heat-sinking and efficiency as well as reduced size. The LED die is supported by a
ceramic base and is overlaid with a thin yellow phosphor sheet. The entire device is
encapsulated in a hemispherical silicone lens. The device illustrated also makes use of
an InGaN LED chip, but with a shorter center wavelength (= 445 nm in the violet) and
a narrower FWHM spectral width (= 10 nm). The yellow photoluminescence has a
central wavelength of == 570 nm and a spectral band of == 510-630 nm, corresponding
to a FWHM of = 120 nm, somewhat narrower than that of the first-generation device.
Violet and yellow are complementary colors so metameric cool-white light results.
we Figure 18.1-23 Evolution of the phosphor-
#2, oe conversion white LED. (a) White-light emission
$ from an early device (са. 2000) containing an
№ InGaN LED die and a yellow phosphor in а 5-
(a) mm-diameter dual in-line package (DIP). This
device generated metameric cool-white light with
a wall-plug luminous efficacy n, = 20 Im/W.
(b) A contemporary device comprising an InGaN
\ LED die overlaid with a thin yellow phosphor
Zs Ч sheet and a 3-mm-diameter hemispherical lens in
2 в а surface-mounted-technology package. Devices
F ( SS а `` such аз these provide metameric cool-white light
>” So with P, > 500 Im and 7, > 300 Im/W, a factor
SS of 15 larger than that of early devices such as that
; portrayed in (a).
Method 2: Additive color mixing. The second method of obtaining metameric
white light relies on multiple dies that generate different colors. Appropriate combi-
nations of red, green, and blue light are perceived as white, a phenomenon illustrated
in Fig. 18.1-24. Additive color mixing is used in luminaires to provide light of tunable
color. In the terminology of LED lighting, a luminaire is a light fixture containing one
or more LED lamps along with optics that shape and guide the emitted light to the
exterior.

18.1 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES 815
Figure 18.1-24 Additive color mixing. A de-
vice that generates light of tunable color often
contains LEDs that emit Red (R), Blue (B), and
> Green (G), as shown. When observed, the over-
lapping light beams yield the following colors, as
С portrayed in the figure:
B+G — С (Cyan)
R+B — М (Magenta)
R+G —> У (Yellow)
R+B+G > _ W (White)
Array LEDs
Modern color-mixing LEDs, which contain red, green, and blue dies within a single
LED package, have the merit that they can be electrically tuned to emit essentially any
color within the gamut of human vision. An example is provided by the array LED
illustrated in Fig. 18.1-25, which contains red, green, and blue dies, together with a
white phosphor-conversion emitter, all in close proximity and individually addressable.
A 5-mm-diameter hemispherical silicone lens caps this multicolor array LED.
Figure 18.1-25 A color-mixing LED compris-
ing individually addressable red, green, and blue
\ dies, along with a white phosphor-conversion
| <2 emitter, in an SMD package capped by a 5-mm-
ь 2 2.) diameter hemispherical lens. Array LEDs such as
© > р these can be electrically tuned to emit essentially
= any color in the gamut of human vision, including
metameric white light.
COB LEDs
A chip-on-board (COB) LED, sometimes called an LED integrated array, offers
a modular alternative to a collection of discrete LEDs. As displayed in Fig. 18.1-26,
high luminous flux is attained by making use of a large number of dies on a chip (often
tens but sometimes hundreds), with high packing density, configured in the form of
a single circuit and mounted on a printed-circuit board or other substrate. The device
serves as a uniform diffuse source of light and is suitable for many single-color lighting
applications, directional and non-directional alike. Chip-on-board LEDs are available
with a broad range of parameters, including size, die density, operating voltage, color,
light output, and efficiency.
Figure 18.1-26 An illuminated chip-on-board
ss (COB) device containing 120 InGaN dies embed-
Е й 2 ===: ded in а 3-cm-diameter, 1.5-mm-thick layer of
==> ~=== yellow phosphor. Drawing 125 W of electrical
Е cee > power, a device such as this provides metameric
“=~ cool-white light with a luminous flux = 18 000 Im
and a wall-plug luminous efficacy = 145 lm/W.

816 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

LED Retrofit Lamps

An LED lamp designed as a drop-in replacement for an incandescent lamp is known
as an LED retrofit lamp. These devices, generally called bulbs, typically comprise
single- and multiple-die LEDs incorporated into plastic housings. The operating char-
acteristics of the lamp, usually indicated on the packaging, include the luminous flux
(im), wall-plug luminous efficacy (Im/W), correlated color temperature (° К), color
rendering index (CRI), electrical power consumption (W), as well as the electrical
power consumption of an incandescent lamp with the same luminous flux.

A white LED retrofit lamp, the top portion of which is illustrated in the cutaway
view depicted in Fig. 18.1-27, closely resembles its incandescent counterpart, at least
from a morphological perspective, and it has roughly the same weight. It incorporates
a collection of surface-mounted devices, like the one depicted in Fig. 18.1-23(6), or
chip-on-board devices such as that illustrated in Fig. 18.1-26.

Diffusing - Array LEDs

globe v4 or COB devices

ese
\ ' @ e e

Figure 18.1-27 A white LED retrofit lamp contains an array of LEDs or chip-on-board (COB)
devices enclosed in a diffusing globe. The cooling means, drive and dimmer electronics, and screw
base are not shown. A device such as that depicted here might consume 10 W of electrical power
and generate light indistinguishable from that produced by an incandescent bulb consuming 100 W
of electrical power. An omnidirectional and dimmable lamp comprising 10 LEDs, each generating
a luminous flux of 150 Im, produces metameric warm-white light with an overall luminous flux
P, = 1500 Im and a wall-plug luminous efficacy 7, = 150 Im/W. The emitted light often has а
correlated color temperature (CCT) in the vicinity of 2700° К and a color rendering index (CRD) of
about 90. Such lamps have life spans in excess of 25 000 hours.
The bulb can contain a heat sink or a plastic shroud that is vented at the top and
bottom, allowing the lamp to be cooled by convection. Contemporary retrofit lamps
exhibit wall-plug luminous efficacies in excess of 200 Im/W and are available at various
luminous-flux levels and correlated color temperatures. The optimization of efficiency
and of the distribution of emitted light has led to the development of lamps with a
variety of shapes.

Retrofit lamps usually use screw bases and operate at line voltage. The circuitry
incorporated within the bulb serves as a built-in driver. A collection of LEDs connected
in series can be driven by a DC current obtained by rectifying AC line-voltage with
diodes and capacitors. The LEDs can also be directly driven by the AC current, emitting
light every other half cycle. Alternatively, wiring them as two antiparallel strands of
series-connected LEDs results in half of them emitting light every half cycle. LED
lamps can be dimmed either by reducing the applied voltage or by using a pulse-width-
modulated current driver.

OLED Light Panels

OLED light panels are large-area light sources fashioned from organic light-emitting
diodes (OLEDs), which are efficient generators of electroluminescence in the blue,
green, and red. White organic light-emitting diodes (WOLEDs), fabricated in the
manner prescribed in Fig. 18.1-22, generate white light via additive color mixing, as

18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS 817
depicted in Fig. 18.1-24. They have near-unity internal quantum efficiency and provide
excellent color rendition. A white OLED light panel comprises a single, broad-area,
vertically stacked OLED, such as that displayed in Fig. 18.1-22(b). Though typically
designed to emit white light, OLED panels can alternatively be configured to emit light
of any color, and to accommodate dynamic color tuning. Such panels have a spatial
light-emission pattern that is nearly Lambertian so they offer large-area homogeneous
lighting without glare. Though their luminous flux is limited, OLED light panels are
available in a broad range of sizes, shapes, and color temperatures. When fabricated
on transparent plastic substrates, they are lightweight, thin, and flexible, so they can be
configured in unique shapes. A white OLED light panel is displayed in Fig. 18.1-28.

Figure 18.1-28 A 1/4-mm-thick white OLED
light panel that generates metameric white

sD? light with a luminous flux P, = 75 Im, a

luminous efficacy у, = 60 Im/W, a CCT =
3000° K, and a CRI = 90. It has a life span of
some 40 000 hours. Such panels offer large-area
homogeneous illumination.

18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS
Semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs), also called semiconductor laser ampli-
fiers (SLAs), are often used as photonic switches. As discussed in Sec. 24.3B, an SOA
may be rapidly switched on and off by applying and removing an injected electric
current. In the presence of gain (when the device is on), it acts as an amplifier, while
in the absence of gain (when the device is off), it acts as an absorber. The SOA thus
behaves as a fast photonic switch with a large extinction ratio. Moreover, arrays of
SOAs may be interconnected via optical fibers to form complex photonic switches.
Semiconductor optical amplifiers are also useful for wavelength conversion, as dis-
cussed in Sec. 24.3D, as well as for optical demultiplexing and optical clock recovery.
They also serve as photonic logic gates in optical processing (Sec. 24.4). Though laser
diodes enjoy wide use as sources in optical fiber communications, amplification in such
systems is better served by optical fiber amplifiers (OFAs) such as EDFAs, REFAs, and
RFAs, as explained in Sec. 25.1C.

The principle underlying the operation of an SOA is the same as that for other laser
amplifiers: the creation of a population inversion that renders stimulated emission more
prevalent than absorption. The population inversion is usually achieved by electric-
current injection in some form of a p—n junction diode; a forward bias causes carrier
pairs to be injected into the junction region where they recombine to emit stimulated
emission. However, the theory of the SOA is somewhat more complex than that pre-
sented in Chapter 15 for the conventional laser amplifier inasmuch as the transitions
take place between bands of closely spaced energy levels rather than between well-
separated discrete energy levels or manifolds. For purposes of comparison, neverthe-
less, the SOA may be viewed as a device that operates via a form of in-band pumping.

The extension of the laser amplifier theory set forth in Chapter 15 to semiconductor
devices was provided in Chapter 17. We proceed to use the results derived in Sec. 17.2
to obtain expressions for the gain and bandwidth of semiconductor optical amplifiers.
We then consider pumping schemes suitable for attaining a population inversion and
highlight the benefits of using heterostructure, quantum-well, and quantum-dot am-
plifier configurations. We then compare the performance of semiconductor optical
amplifiers and optical fiber amplifiers, and finally consider superluminescent diodes.

818 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
The theoretical underpinnings of SOA operation carry over to laser-diode operation,
considered in Sec. 18.3.
A. Gain and Bandwidth
Light of frequency и can interact with the carriers of a semiconductor material of
bandgap energy Е, via band-to-band transitions, provided that v > E,/h. The inci-
dent photons may be absorbed, resulting in the generation of electron-hole pairs, or
they may produce additional photons through stimulated electron—hole recombination
radiation (Fig. 18.2-1). When emission is more likely than absorption, net optical gain
ensues and material can serve as a coherent optical amplifier.
E
Eg me ii MA
О О О ОВО О О В ОВ ОВ

(а) k (b) k
Figure 18.2-1 (a) The absorption of a photon results in the generation of an electron-hole pair.
(b) Electron—hole recombination can be induced by a photon; the result is the stimulated emission of
an identical photon.

Expressions for the rate of stimulated emission r,,(v) and the rate of photon ab-
sorption гаь(и) are provided in (17.2-18) and (17.2-19), respectively. These quantities
depend on the photon-flux spectral intensity ¢,; the quantum-mechanical strength of
the transition for the particular material under consideration (which is implicit in the
value of the electron-hole radiative recombination lifetime т,); the optical joint density
of states 0(и); and the occupancy probabilities for emission f.(v) and absorption
fa(v).

The optical joint density of states о(и) is determined by the E-k relations for
electrons and holes and by the conservation of energy and momentum. With the help
of the parabolic approximation for the E— relations near the conduction- and valence-
band edges, it was shown in (17.2-6) and (17.2-7) that the energies of the electron and
hole that interact with a photon of energy hv are

Mr
E,=E,.+—(hv—E£,), Е! = £2-—hy, (18.2-1)
Me
respectively, where те and m, are their effective masses and 1/m, = 1/те + 1/my.
The resulting optical joint density of states that interacts with a photon of energy hy
was determined to be [see (17.2-9)]
o(v) = ar Vhv—E,, hv > E,. (18.2-2)
It is apparent that о(и) increases as the square root of photon energy above the bandgap.

The occupancy probabilities f.(v) and f,(v) are determined by the pumping rate
through the quasi-Fermi levels Ey, and E р». The quantity f.(v) is the probability that
а conduction-band state of energy Eg is filled with an electron and a valence-band
state of energy E; is filled with a hole. The quantity f,(v), on the other hand, is the

18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS 819
probability that a conduction-band state of energy E2 is empty and a valence-band state
of energy E is filled with an electron. The Fermi inversion factor [see (17.2-25)]

fg(v) = fev) — fav) = fe(E2) — fo(E1) (18.2-3)
represents the degree of population inversion. The quantity Л (и) depends on both the
Fermi function for the conduction band, f.(E) = 1/{ехр[(Ё — Ер)/КТ] + 1}, and
the Fermi function for the valence band, f,(E) = 1/{exp|(E — Ey,)/kT] + 1}. It
is a function of temperature and of the quasi-Fermi levels Ey, and Ey,, which in turn
are determined by the pumping rate. A complete population inversion can in principle
be achieved in a semiconductor optical amplifier [fj(v) = 1], so it behaves like a
four-level laser system in that respect (Sec. 15.2В).

The results provided above were combined in (17.2-24) to provide an expression for
the net gain coefficient, yo(v) = [rst(v) — гаь(и)]/Фь,

2

Yo(v) = San o(v) fa(v). (18.2-4)

"Tr Gain Coefficient
Comparing (18.2-4) with (15.1-4), it is apparent that the quantity o(v) f,(v) in the
semiconductor optical amplifier plays the role of Ng(v) in other laser amplifiers, and
that o(v) = yo(v)/An.
Amplifier Bandwidth
In accordance with (18.2-3) and (18.2-4), a semiconductor medium provides net optical
gain at the frequency и when f.(E2) > f,(E1). Conversely, net attenuation ensues
when f.(E2) < f,(E1). Thus, a semiconductor material in thermal equilibrium (un-
doped or doped) cannot provide net gain whatever its temperature; this is because the
conduction- and valence-band Fermi levels coincide (Е = Ey, = Ey). External
pumping is required to separate the Fermi levels of the two bands in order to achieve
amplification.

The condition f.(E2) > f,(E1) is equivalent to the requirement that the photon
energy be smaller than the separation between the quasi-Fermi levels, 1.е., ли < Ep. —
Е», аз demonstrated in Exercise 17.2-1. Of course, the photon energy must be larger
than the bandgap energy (hv > E,) in order that laser amplification occur by means of
interband transitions. Thus, if the pumping rate is sufficiently large that the separation
between the two quasi-Fermi levels exceeds the bandgap energy E,, the medium can
act as an amplifier for optical frequencies in the band

Fo cy < Flea Fhe (18.2-5)

h h Amplifier Bandwidth
For hy < Е’ the medium is transparent, whereas for hy > Ес — Ey it is an attenuator
instead of an amplifier. Equation (18.2-5) demonstrates that the amplifier bandwidth
increases with Ez, — Ey,, and therefore with pumping level. In this respect it is unlike
the atomic laser amplifier, which has an unsaturated bandwidth Av that is independent
of pumping level (Fig. 15.1-2).

Computation of the gain properties is simplified considerably if thermal excitations
can be ignored (i.e., if T = 0° К). The Fermi functions are then simply f.(E2) = 1 for
Е› < Ey, and 0 otherwise; f,(E,) = 1 for E, < Ey, and 0 otherwise. In that case the

820 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Fermi inversion factor is
_ f4+1, hv < Efe — Ев
fal) = { —1, otherwise. ! (18.2-6)
Schematic plots of the functions o(v), (и), and the gain coefficient yo(v) are pre-
sented in Fig. 18.2-2, illustrating how yo(v) changes sign and turns into a loss coeffi-
cient when hy > Ey, — Ед». The и? dependence of Yo(v), arising from the А? factor
in the numerator of (18.2-4), varies sufficiently slowly that it may be ignored. Finite
temperature smoothes the functions f,(v) and Yo(v), as shown by the dashed curves
in Fig. 18.2-2.
|
Eg ЕЕ» hv .
A) Figure 18.2-2 Dependence on energy of
Е. the optical joint density of states o(v), the
Fermi inversion factor f,(v), and the gain
hv coefficient y9(v) at Г = 0° К (solid curves)
в NS and at room temperature (dashed curves).
Photons with energy between Е, and Ey, —
Yo) Er, undergo laser amplification.
0
РА Eg hv
8 \
\
\
\
Dependence of the Gain Coefficient on Pumping Level
The gain coefficient yo (и) increases both in its width and in its magnitude as the pump-
ing rate R is elevated. As provided in (18.1-1), a constant pumping rate R (number
of injected excess electron-hole pairs per cm? per second) establishes a steady-state
concentration of injected electron-hole pairs in accordance with An = Ap = Rr,
where т is the electron-hole recombination lifetime (which includes both radiative
and nonradiative contributions). Knowledge of the steady-state total concentrations of
electrons and holes, п = по + An and p = ро + An, respectively, permits the Fermi
levels Ey, and Ey, to be determined via (18.1-8) and (18.1-9). Once the Fermi levels
are known, the computation of the gain coefficient can proceed using (18.2-4). The
dependence of yo(v) on An, and thereby on А, is illustrated in Example 18.2-1.
«И
EXAMPLE 18.2-1. Gain Coefficient for an InGaAsP SOA. A sample of the quaternary
material Ing.72Gao.23ASo.¢Po.4, with bandgap energy E, = 0.95 eV, is operated as a semiconductor
optical amplifier at a wavelength of A, = 1300 nm at T = 300° K. The sample is undoped but
has residual concentrations of + 2 x 1017 cm~? donors and acceptors, and a radiative electron-hole
recombination lifetime т, = 2.5 ns. The effective masses of the electrons and holes are m, 0.06 mo
and m, = 0.4 то, respectively, and the refractive index п = 3.5. Given the steady-state injected-
carrier concentration An (which is controlled by the injection rate R and the overall recombination
time т), the gain coefficient yo(v) may be computed from (18.2-4) in conjunction with (18.1-8)

18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS 821
and (18.1-9). As illustrated in Fig. 18.2-3, both the amplifier bandwidth and the peak value of the
gain coefficient у» increase with An. The energy at which the peak occurs also increases with An,
as expected from the behavior shown in Fig. 18.2-2. Furthermore, the minimum energy at which
amplification occurs decreases slightly with increasing An as a result of band-tail states, which
reduce the bandgap energy. At the largest value of An shown (An = 1.8 x 1018 cm), photons
with energies falling between 0.91 and 0.97 eV undergo amplification. This corresponds to a full
amplifier bandwidth of 14.5 THz, and a wavelength range of 80 nm. A more suitable measure is the
bandwidth at the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the gain profile, also called the 3-dB gain
bandwidth, which is 10 THz, corresponding to about 50 nm at Л. = 1300 nm (see Table 15.3-1 fora
comparison with other laser transitions). The calculated peak gain coefficient y, = 270 cm~? at this
value of An is large in comparison with most atomic laser amplifiers.

1.8x10!8
200
300
50 nm
~ —> <— =
"= 100 Е
= .5
Е о и 80 пт Е:
Е -100 7
о An =1x10!8 em? Eq
-200
‘о 1.5 20
Дп (сш) x10!8
«090 09 094 0.96 hv (eV) ()
Figure 18.2-3 (а) Calculated gain coefficient yo(v) for an InGaAsP SOA versus photon energy
hv, with the injected-carrier concentration An as a parameter (Т = 300° К). The band of frequencies
over which amplification occurs (centered near 1300 nm) increases with increasing An. At the
largest value of An shown, the FWHM amplifier bandwidth is 10 THz, corresponding to 0.04 eV
in energy and 50 nm in wavelength. (Adapted from N. K. Dutta, Calculated Absorption, Emission,
and Gain in Ing .72Gao.23ASo.¢Po.4, Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 51, pp. 6095-6100, 1980, Fig. 8.)
(6) Calculated peak gain coefficient y, as a function of An. At the largest value of An, the peak
gain coefficient ~ 270 cm~!. (Adapted from М. К. Dutta and В. J. Nelson, The Case for Auger
Recombination in In;_,Ga;,As,P;_,, Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 53, рр. 74—92, 1982, Fig. 17.)
ПИ

The onset of gain saturation in semiconductor optical amplifiers is not unlike that
of other homogeneously broadened laser amplifiers, as considered in Sec. 15.4. The
relatively large semiconductor transition cross section (Table 15.3-1) implies a small
saturation photon-flux density [Ф. = 1/7, 0(v)] and therefore a reduced gain coeffi-
cient [see (15.4-2) and (15.4-3)]. This in turn limits the overall gain that an SOA can
provide.

In common with other optical amplifiers, SOAs suffer from amplified spontaneous
emission noise (Sec. 15.5); however, they are also affected by noise associated with
temperature and carrier fluctuations.

Approximate Peak Gain Coefficient

The complex dependence of the gain coefficient on the injected-carrier concentra-
tion makes the analysis of the semiconductor amplifier (and laser) somewhat difficult.
Because of this, it is customary to adopt an empirical approach in which the peak
gain coefficient y, is assumed to be linearly related to An for values of An near
the operating point. As the example in Fig. 18.2-3() illustrates, the approximation is
reasonable when jy, is sufficiently large. The dependence of the peak gain coefficient

822 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Ур on An may then be modeled by the linear relation
An
Пт Peak Gain Coefficient
(Linear Approximation)
which is illustrated in Fig. 18.2-4. The parameters © and An, are chosen to satisfy
the following limits:
= When An = 0, у, = —а, where a represents the absorption coefficient of the
semiconductor in the absence of current injection.
= When An = Any, yp = 0. Thus, An, is the injected-carrier concentration at
which emission and absorption just balance so that the medium is transparent.
Figure 18.2-4 Peak value of the gain coeffi-
> cient y, as а function of injected-carrier сопсеп-
Е tration Ал for the approximate linear model. The
Oo = quantity a represents the attenuation coefficient in
я 5 й the absence of injection, whereas An, represents
5 0 the injected-carrier concentration at which emis-
B= 2 и Any An sion and absorption just balance each other. The
2 — и solid portion of the straight line matches the more
5 / realistic calculation considered in the preceding
7 —а / subsection.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 18.2-2. Approximate Peak Gain Coefficient for an InGaAsP SOA. The
peak gain coefficient у, versus An for InGaAsP presented in Fig. 18.2-3(b) may be approximately
fit by a linear relation that takes the form of (18.2-7), with the parameters Any = 1.25 x 1018 сш-3
and a = 600 cm~!. For An = 1.4Any = 1.75 x 1018 ст-3, the linear model yields a peak gain
coefficient y, = 240 cm~'. For an InGaAsP crystal of length d = 350 jum, this corresponds to a total
gain exp(ypd) = 4447 ог 36.5 dB. In practice, this value is reduced by gain saturation, as discussed
above, as well as by coupling losses, which are typically 3 to 5 dB per facet.
«ПИ
Increasing the injected-carrier concentration from below to above the transparency
value An, results in the semiconductor changing from a strong absorber of light
[fg(v) < 0] into a high-gain amplifier of light [f,(v) > 0]. The very same large
transition probability that makes the semiconductor a good absorber also makes it a
good amplifier, as may be understood by comparing (17.2-18) and (17.2-19).
B. Pumping
Optical Pumping
Pumping may be achieved by means of external light, as depicted in Fig. 18.2-5, pro-
vided that its photon energy is sufficiently large (> E,). Pump photons are absorbed by
the semiconductor, resulting in the generation of carrier pairs. The generated electrons
and holes decay to the bottom of the conduction band and the top of the valence
band, respectively. If the intraband relaxation time is much shorter than the interband

18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS 823
Pump
photon
AN
Input signal Output signal Figure 18.2-5 | Optical pumping of a semi-
photon WWW> WW AA р conductor optical amplifier.
дер
k
relaxation time, as is usually the case, a steady-state population inversion between the
bands may be established, as discussed in Sec. 15.2 for conventional laser amplifiers.
Current Pumping
A more practical scheme for pumping a semiconductor optical amplifier is by means
of electron-hole injection in a heavily doped p—n junction — a diode. As with the
LED (Sec. 18.1) the junction is forward biased so that minority carriers are injected
into the junction region (electrons into the p-type region and holes into the n-type
region). Figure 18.1-5 shows the energy-band diagram of a forward-biased heavily
doped p—n junction. The conduction-band and valence-band quasi-Fermi levels, Er,
and Е», lie within the conduction and valence bands, respectively, and a state of quasi-
equilibrium exists within the junction region. The quasi-Fermi levels are sufficiently
well separated so that a population inversion is achieved and net gain may be obtained
over the bandwidth Е’ < hy < Ey, — Ey, within the active region. The thickness [ of
the active region is an important parameter of the diode that is determined principally
by the diffusion lengths of the minority carriers at both sides of the junction. Typical
values of | for InGaAsP are 1-3 jum.
Output
photons
_ 2.
| Figure 18.2-6 Geometry of a simple semi-
; conductor optical amplifier. Charge carriers
+o °- travel perpendicularly to the p—n junction,
n whereas photons travel in the plane of the
junction.
AMV
Area А
Input
photons
If an electric current $ is injected through an area A = wd, where w and d are the
width and height of the device, respectively, into a volume [А (as portrayed in Fig.
18.2-6), then the steady-state carrier injection rate is К = i/elA = J/el per second
per unit volume, where J = i/A is the injected current density. The resulting injected-

824 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
carrier concentration is then
T T
An=TR=—i=— J. 18.2-8
elA el ( )
The injected-carrier concentration is therefore directly proportional to the injected
current density so that the results shown in Figs. 18.2-3(b) and 18.2-4 with An as a
parameter may just as well have J as a parameter. In particular, it follows from (18.2-
7) and (18.2-8) that within the linear approximation implicit in (18.2-7), the peak gain
coefficient is linearly related to the injected current density J, 1.е.,
J
Ур = o( — 1), (18.2-9)
Jr Peak Gain Coefficient
The transparency current density J, is given by
el
Jy = — Any, (18.2-10)
ПЕТЬ Transparency Current Density
where 7; = 7/7; again represents the internal quantum efficiency.

When J = 0, the peak gain coefficient у, = —a becomes the attenuation co-
efficient, as is apparent in Fig. 18.2-7. When J = J>, Yp = 0 so that the material
is transparent and neither amplifies nor attenuates. Net gain can be achieved only
when the injected current density J exceeds its transparency value J,. Note that J,
is directly proportional to the junction thickness / so that a lower transparency current
density J, is achieved by using a narrower active-region thickness. This is an important
consideration in the design of semiconductor optical amplifiers (and lasers).

8

Е Figure 18.2-7 Peak optical gain

5 = х :

23 coefficient y, as a function of cur-

3 о 0 / rent density J for the approximate

= я / Sr Current density J linear model. When J = Ут the

3, 8 и material is transparent and exhibits

3 / neither gain nor loss.

Ф /

a —а
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 18.2-3. СатоЁап тСаА$Р SOA. Ап InGaAsP semiconductor optical amplifier
operates at 300° К and has the following parameters: т, = 2.5 ns, 7; = 0.5, Any = 1.25 x 1018
ст 3, and a = 600 сш-". The junction has thickness | = 2 ит, length d = 200 ym, and width
и = 10 wm. Using (18.2-10), the current density that just makes the semiconductor transparent
is Jy = 3.2 x 10* A/cm’. A slightly larger current density J = 3.5 x 10* A/cm? provides a
peak gain coefficient у» = 56 cm! as is clear from (18.2-9). This gives rise to an amplifier gain
С = exp(Ypd) = exp(1.12) == 3. However, since the junction area А = wd = 2 x 10-5 cm?, a
rather large injection current 1 = JA = 700 mA is required to produce this current density.
ПОНИ

18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS 825
Motivation for Heterostructures
If the thickness [ of the active region in Example 18.2-3 were reduced from 2 jm to,
say, 0.1 ит, the current density J; would be reduced by a factor of 20, to the more
reasonable value 1600 A/cm?. Because proportionately less volume would have to be
pumped, the amplifier could then provide the same gain with a lower injected current
density. Such a reduction in the thickness of the active region poses a potential problem,
however, because the diffusion lengths of the electrons and holes in InGaAsP are
several итп and the carriers would tend to diffuse out of this smaller region. However,
it is possible to confine carriers to an active region whose thickness is smaller than
their diffusion lengths by making use of a heterostructure device, as discussed in
Sec. 18.2C. Indeed, light can simultaneously be confined in such a structure, providing
an additional advantage.
C. Heterostructures
As is apparent from (18.2-9) and (18.2-10), the diode-laser peak amplifier gain co-
efficient Y, varies inversely with the thickness / of the active region. It is therefore
advantageous to use the smallest thickness possible. The active region is defined by
the diffusion distances of minority carriers on both sides of the junction. The concept
of the double heterostructure is to form heterojunction potential barriers on both sides
of the p—n junction to provide a potential well that limits the distance over which
minority carriers may diffuse. The junction barriers define a region of space within
which minority carriers are confined, allowing active regions of thickness [ as small as
0.1 um to be achieved. Yet thinner confinement regions, = 0.01 jum, can be attained
by making use of quantum-well structures, as will be discussed in Sec. 18.2D.
Electromagnetic confinement of the amplified optical beam can be achieved simul-
taneously if the material of the active layer is selected such that its refractive index is
slightly greater than that of the two surrounding layers, in which case the structure acts
as an optical waveguide (Sec. 9.2).
Output
photons
+o о
п
: Input Figure 18.2-8 Energy-band diagram and
photons refractive index as functions of position for a
iS double-heterostructure semiconductor optical
Е | ваше : amplifier.
eV g2 Е
| И ПОНИ 93
п Ny
The double-heterostructure design therefore calls for three layers of different lattice-
matched materials, as illustrated in Fig. 18.2-8:

826 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Layer 1: p-type, energy bandgap Е сл, refractive index пл
Layer 2: p-type, energy bandgap Ego, refractive index no
Layer 3: n-type, energy bandgap F 43, refractive index n3
The semiconductor materials are selected such that E,; and E,3 are greater than E49,
which achieves carrier confinement, while nz is greater than n, and ng, which achieves
light confinement. The active layer (layer 2) is made quite thin (0.1 to 0.2 ит) to
minimize the transparency current density J, and thereby to maximize the peak gain
coefficient y,. Stimulated emission takes place in the p—n junction between layers 2
and 3.
In summary, the double-heterostructure design offers the following advantages:
= Increased amplifier gain, for a given injected current density, as a result of de-
creased active-layer thickness, in accordance with (18.2-9) and (18.2-10). Injected
minority carriers are confined within the thin active layer between the two hetero-
junction barriers and are prevented from diffusing to the surrounding layers.
= Increased amplifier gain resulting from the confinement of photons within the
active layer as a result of its larger refractive index. The active medium acts as an
optical waveguide.

= Reduced loss, resulting from the inability of layers 1 and 3 to absorb the guided

photons because the bandgaps of these layers, F,; and E,3, are larger than the
photon energy (hv = Ego < Ел, Ego).

Two examples of double-heterostructure semiconductor optical amplifiers follow:

= InGaAsP/InP Double-Heterostructure Laser Diode Amplifier. The active layer,

Inj_,Ga,As;_,P,, is surrounded by layers of InP. The composition parameters x
and y are selected so that the materials are lattice matched. Operation is thereby
restricted to a range of values of x and у for which E,»9 corresponds to the
wavelength band 1.1—1.7 jum.

= GaAs/AlGaAs Double-Heterostructure Laser Diode Amplifier. The active layer

(layer 2) is fabricated from GaAs (Ego = 1.42 eV, no = 3.6). The surround-
ing layers (1 and 3) are fabricated from Al,Ga,_,;As with Е, > 1.43 eV and
п < 3.6 (by 5-10%). This amplifier typically operates within the 0.82—0.88-
ит wavelength band when the AlGaAs composition parameter is in the range
x = 0.35-0.5.
D. Quantum-Well Structures
As discussed in Sec. 18.2C, heterostructures offer a reduced thickness of the active
layer within which carriers and photons are confined. This in turn provides increased
amplifier gain and reduced amplifier loss. When the thickness of the active layer is
reduced yet further, say to 5-10 nm (which is smaller than the de Broglie wavelength
of a thermalized electron), quantum effects play a key role. Since the active layer in
a double heterostructure has a bandgap energy smaller than that of the surrounding
layers, the structure then acts as a quantum well (Sec. 17.1G), and is referred to as a
quantum-well device.

The band structure and energy-momentum (E-4) relations of a quantum well are
different from those of a bulk material. The conduction band is split into a number
of subbands, labeled by the quantum number 4 = 1, 2,..., each with its own energy—
momentum relation and density of states. The bottoms of these subbands have energies
E. + Eq, where Ey = 1? (4п/1)? /2те, а = 1,2,..., are the energies of an electron
of effective mass m, in a one-dimensional quantum well of thickness / (see Figs. 17.1-
25 and 17.1-27; 41 and d, in Chapter 17 correspond to 4 and / here). Each subband
has a parabolic E-k relation and a constant density of states that is independent of

18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS 827
energy. The overall density of states in the conduction band, o,(E), therefore assumes
a staircase distribution [see (17.1-37)] with steps at energies E,+E,, а = 1,2,.... The
valence band has similar subbands at energies Е, — Е’, where Е’ = h? (qr/l)?/2m,
are the energies of a hole of effective mass m, in a quantum well of thickness [.

The interactions of photons with electrons and holes in a quantum well take the
form of energy- and momentum-conserving transitions between the conduction and
valence bands. The transitions must also conserve the quantum number 4, as illustrated
in Fig. 18.2-9(a); they obey rules similar to those that govern transitions between
the conduction and valence bands in bulk semiconductors. The expressions for the
transition probabilities and gain coefficient in the bulk material (Sec. 17.2) apply to the
quantum-well structure if we simply replace the bandgap energy Е’, with the energy
gap between the subbands, E,g = Е, + Е. + Е р and use a constant density of states
rather than one that varies as the square root of energy. The total gain coefficient is the
sum of the gain coefficients provided by all of the subbands (4 = 1, 2,...).

E
Xe /
| =1
---- Та
ГЕ а _.
Е
9> Eg, в E, av) р
| E, и _. и
y ПО И 7
7
eA J
q=2 /
"=
(a) k (b) Ед Eg, Egy hv
Figure 18.2-9 (a) E-k relations of different subbands. (b) Optical joint density of states for a
quantum-well structure (staircase curve) and for a bulk semiconductor (dashed curve). The first jump
occurs at energy E,; =Е + ЕЁ + E ‘ (where E, and E и are, respectively, the lowest energies of an
electron and a hole in the quantum well).
Density of States
Consider transitions between the two subbands of quantum number g. To satisfy the
conservation of energy and momentum, a photon of energy hy interacts with states
of energies Е = Ес + E, + (m,/m-)(hv — Еда) in the upper subband and Е — hv
in the lower. The optical joint density of states o(v) is related to о.(Е) by o(v) =
(dE/dv) 0.(E) = (бт. /те) ос (Е). It follows from (17.1-37) that
hm, Me 2M,
— — = —, b> ЕЕ. ЧЕ’!
o(v) = те ПР М’ gee! (18.2-11)
0, otherwise.

Including transitions between all subbands q = 1,2,..., we arrive at a o(v) that has
a Staircase distribution with steps at the energy gaps between subbands of the same
quantum number [Fig. 18.2-9(6)].

828 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Gain Coefficient
The gain coefficient of the device is given by the usual expression [see (17.2-24)]
2
= —_ 18.2-12
Yolv) = эр atv) fal) ( )
where the Fermi inversion factor f, (v7) depends on the quasi-Fermi levels and temper-
ature, and is the same for bulk and quantum-well lasers. The density of states o(v),
however, differs in the two cases, as we have shown. The frequency dependences of
o(v), (к), and their product are illustrated in Fig. 18.2-10 for quantum-well and
bulk double-heterostructure configurations. The quantum-well structure has a smaller
peak gain coefficient and a narrower gain profile. It is assumed in the construction of
ov) .
у
Вик и] NN
ра QW
VA
7
/
fv) Eg Eg, hv
+ Figure 18.2-10 Density of states o(v),
Fermi inversion factor f,(v), and gain coeffi-
E,. - Ep, hy cient Yo(v) in quantum-well (solid) and bulk
о (dashed) structures.
1
yo”) Bulk
me Qw
|= Yn 7 \
5 /
0
Z hv
i \
\
х
Fig. 18.2-10 that only a single step of the staircase function о(и) occurs at an energy
smaller than Ey, — Ey,,, as is the case under usual injection conditions.
The maximum gain coefficient у», may then be determined by substituting f,(v) =
land o(v) = 2m,/hil in (18.2-12), which yields
dm»
n= =: 18.2-13
Yn Ohl
Relation Between Gain Coefficient and Current Density
By increasing the injected current density J, the concentration of excess electrons and
holes An is increased and, therefore, so is the separation between the quasi-Fermi
levels Ey, — Evy. The effect of this increase on the gain coefficient yo(v) may be
assessed by examining the diagrams in Fig. 18.2-10. For sufficiently small J there is
no gain. When J is such that Er, — Ey, just exceeds the gap E,; between the а = 1
subbands, the medium provides gain. The peak gain coefficient increases sharply and

18.2 SEMICONDUCTOR OPTICAL AMPLIFIERS 829
saturates at the value у. An increase of J increases the gain spectral width but not its
peak value. If J is increased yet further, to the point where Ey, — Ey, exceeds the gap
E42 between the 4 = 2 subbands, the peak gain coefficient undergoes another jump,
and so on. The gain profile can therefore be quite broad, thereby providing a wide
tuning range for such devices.

Materials and Device Structures

The structure of a semiconductor optical amplifier resembles that of a laser diode op-
erated above transparency but below the threshold of oscillation (Sec. 18.3). Semicon-
ductor optical amplifiers can be made to operate in any region of the optical spectrum
by judiciously choosing the semiconductor material and using compositional tuning.
The center wavelength, bandwidth, and gain depend both on the material and on the
structure of the device.

SOAs designed for applications in the near infrared are usually fabricated from
InGaAsP, InGaAs, or InP. In the 1300-1600-пт telecommunications band, achievable
bandwidths are АЛ = 50 nm, corresponding to Ди = 10 THz at A, = 1300 nm
(Example 18.2-1). This is broader than the bandwidths offered by EDFAs but is similar
to those provided by RFAs (see Secs. 15.3C and 15.3D, respectively). Quantum-well
SOAs offer a substantial reduction in the drive current required to achieve transparency
but otherwise behave similarly to bulk devices.

The gain of an SOA is usually limited to = 15 dB because of gain saturation and
insertion losses of 3—5 dB рег facet (Example 18.2-2). Saturation leads to interchannel
and intersymbol interference, rendering SOAs unsuitable for use in DWDM communi-
cation systems. Furthermore, the short semiconductor recombination time (Table 15.3-
1) leaves the SOA susceptible to high-frequency noise that might reside in the pumping
current and optical signal, leading to noise figures = 8-10 dB as opposed to 3 dB
for EDFAs. It is important to note that if an SOA is to be operated as a broadband
single-pass device (i.e., as a traveling-wave amplifier), the facet reflectances must be
reduced to a minimum. Failure to do so can lead to multiple reflections and a gain
profile that is modulated by the resonator modes; this can also result in oscillation,
which, of course, obviates the possibility of controllable amplification. Techniques for
reducing reflectances include the use of antireflection coatings and tilted waveguides.

As a result of the issues discussed above, optical-transmission applications of SOAs
have, for the most part, been limited to metropolitan optical networks where low gain
suffices for overcoming losses associated with multiple optical add—drop nodes. The
appeal of SOAs, rather, resides in their use as photonic switches (see Sec. 24.3B),
wavelength converters (see Sec. 24.3D), and logic gates in optical processing. They
also are useful for optical demultiplexing and optical clock recovery.

EXAMPLE 18.2-4. Waveguide Amplifiers. Multiquantum-well semiconductor optical am-
plifiers can be constructed in the form of optical waveguides, providing operation in fundamental
optical modes at increased output saturation powers, and employing direct butt coupling to single-
mode fibers. Such devices have relatively low losses and a small optical confinement factor. As an
example, a 1550-nm InGaAsP/InP quantum-well amplifier with a length of 1 cm provides a fiber-to-
fiber gain of 13 dB.

Comparison of Quantum-Dot and Quantum-Well SOAs

The quantum-dot semiconductor optical amplifier (QD-SOA) offers many of the ad-
vantages and disadvantages offered by its quantum-well counterpart, and indeed their

830 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

performance under CW operation is comparable. As a result of inhomogeneous broad-
ening, QD-SOAs enjoy bandwidths that can extend up to 200 nm, corresponding to
Av = 25 THz at A, = 1550 nm; however, a concomitant reduction in the gain
per unit bandwidth and saturated output power ensues. Nevertheless, the QD-SOA is
distinguished by its greater unsaturated gain and faster gain dynamics, which provide
efficient amplification for short optical pulses and pulse trains. Gain recovery times can
extend down to 100 fs, corresponding to operation at > 200 Gb/s.

Comparison of SOAs and OFAs

The semiconductor optical amplifier enjoys advantages and disadvantages with respect
to optical fiber amplifiers such as the erbium-doped fiber amplifier and the Raman fiber
amplifier:

Advantages of SOAs:

= Central wavelength selectable by choice of material

= Compatible with photonic integrated circuits

= Electrical pumping

= Readily modulated via injection current

= Compact

= Low cost

Disadvantages of SOAs:

= Low gain

= Low saturated output power

= High noise

= Substantial interchannel and intersymbol interference

= Sensitivity to thermal effects from heat dissipation

= Sensitivity to facet reflections

= Sensitivity to signal polarization

= Control of transverse-mode characteristics

= High insertion loss

= Incompatibility with fiber geometry
On balance, the performance of the SOA is generally inferior to that of the EDFA and
the RFA, and its use is generally restricted to special applications. The relative merits
of EDFAs and RFAs were considered in Sec. 15.3D.

E. Superluminescent Diodes

Superluminescent diodes (SLEDs) are semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs) op-
erated without an optical signal presented to the input. The light emitted from a SLED
is amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) produced by the device itself. The ASE
takes the same form as the optical noise emitted by a conventional laser amplifier,
as discussed in Sec. 15.5. The SLED is distinguished from an LED in that the level of
current injection is sufficiently high so that stimulated emission outweighs spontaneous
emission.

An example of a SLED is the multiquantum-well InGaAsP/InP structure displayed
in Fig. 18.2-11. The optical output power generated by a SLED is generally greater
than that of an LED but less than that of an LD (Fig. 18.3-5), while the normalized
spectral intensity is typically narrower than that of an LED but broader than that of an
LD (Fig. 18.3-7). A SLED can offer diffraction-limited and spatially coherent emission
comparable to that of an edge-emitting LD, which facilitates coupling the output light
into a single-mode fiber. As with the semiconductor optical amplifier, it is important to
minimize optical feedback to avoid lasing from occurring. This may be achieved in any

18.3 LASERDIODES 831
number of ways, such as by making use of a stripe contact that injects current only over
a portion of the device, by using a tapered-stripe geometry, or by antireflection-coating
or tilting the facets of the device.

contact layer Figure 18.2-11 A MQW InGaAsP/InP
InGaAsP superluminescent diode. SLEDs can generate
waveguides ыы light with substantial optical power and with
war 5. —_ a bandwidth intermediate between that of an
cladding [ 7 SE LED and an LD. It is important to minimize
layers | a — feedback so that laser oscillation does not
InGaAsP/ InGaAsP. S occur. One way of achieving this is to use
act от 7 > а stripe contact that injects current only over
substrate Г a portion of the device (illustrated), which
- increases the loss via absorption.
Superluminescent diodes are used in applications where the long coherence time
of laser light is troublesome, either because its spectrum is too narrow or because
of randomly occurring interferences (speckle). Examples of such applications include
interferometric instrumentation such as optical coherence tomography (Sec. 12.2B),
fiber-optic gyroscopy, and certain fiber-optic sensors. Optical fiber amplifiers are also
sometimes used as sources of superluminescence light.
18.3 LASER DIODES
In this section we consider the general characteristics of conventional laser diodes.
The earliest devices, fabricated in 1962, comprised single p—n junctions of GaAs and
GaAsP, which emitted in the near infrared and red, respectively (see р. 787). Semicon-
ductor lasers have been fabricated in a bewildering variety of forms. They operate at
wavelengths that stretch from the mid-ultraviolet to the far-infrared — and at output
powers that range from nW (for nanolasers) to W (for individual laser diodes) to kW
(for banks of laser diodes). Today’s laser diodes take many forms. Quantum-confined
lasers are discussed in Sec. 18.4, and compact lasers in the form of microcavity and
nanocavity devices are considered in Secs. 18.5 and 18.6, respectively.
A. Amplification, Feedback, and Oscillation
A laser diode is a semiconductor optical amplifier that is endowed with a path for
optical feedback. As discussed in the preceding section, a semiconductor optical am-
plifier is a forward-biased heavily doped p—n junction fabricated from a direct-bandgap
semiconductor material. The injected current is sufficiently large so as to provide
optical gain. In its simplest configuration, the optical feedback is provided by plane
mirrors, which are usually implemented by cleaving the semiconductor material along
its crystal planes. The sharp refractive index difference between the crystal and the
surrounding air causes the cleaved surfaces to act as reflectors. Thus, the semiconductor
crystal acts both as a gain medium and as a Fabry-Perot optical resonator, as illustrated
in Fig. 18.3-1. Provided that the gain coefficient is sufficiently large, the feedback
converts the optical amplifier into an optical oscillator, i.e., a laser. The device is called
a laser diode or a diode laser (it is also sometimes referred to as a semiconductor
injection laser).
The laser diode (LD) bears considerable similarity to the light-emitting diode (LED)
discussed in Sec. 18.1. In both devices, the source of energy is an electric current

832 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Cleaved
surface
ae |- Figure 18.3-1 In its simplest configuration, a
| a | laser diode is a forward-biased р-п junction in
which two surfaces that are perpendicular to the
Lo 5. plane of the junction act as reflectors. These
а п i surfaces are often cleaved along crystal planes
to ensure that they are parallel. The other two
surfaces perpendicular to the plane of the junction
| |: are often roughened to eliminate feedback.
Cleaved
Area А surface
injected into a p—n junction. However, the light emitted from an LED is generated by
spontaneous emission, whereas the light from an LD arises from stimulated emission.

Laser diodes enjoy a number of advantages with respect to other types of lasers:
small size, compatibility with electronic components, high power, high efficiency, as
well as ease of pumping and modulation by electric-current injection. Laser diodes
have manifold uses, as will be considered subsequently.

We begin our discussion of the conditions required for laser oscillation, and the
characteristics of the emitted light, with a brief summary of the basic results that
describe the semiconductor optical amplifier and the Fabry—Perot optical resonator.
Laser Amplification
The gain coefficient yo(v) of a semiconductor optical amplifier has a peak value у,
that is approximately proportional to the injected-carrier concentration, which in turn
iS proportional to the injected current density J. Thus, as provided in (18.2-9) and
(18.2-10), and as illustrated in Fig. 18.2-7,

ya (7-1) ‚ = ol Ann, (18.3-1)

Ут ТЕТЕ
where т; is the radiative electron-hole recombination lifetime, 7; = 7/7; is the internal
quantum efficiency, / is the thickness of the active region, a is the thermal-equilibrium
absorption coefficient, and An, and „Л, are the injected-carrier concentration and cur-
rent density required to just make the semiconductor transparent.
Feedback
The feedback is often obtained by cleaving the crystal planes normal to the plane of
the junction, or by polishing two parallel surfaces of the crystal. The active region of
the p—n junction illustrated in Fig. 18.3-1 then also serves as a planar-mirror optical
resonator of length d and cross-sectional area Jw. Semiconductor materials typically
have large refractive indices, so that the power reflectance for normal incidence at the
semiconductor—air interface,
2
R= (11) (18.3-2)
n+1

is substantial [see (6.2-15) and Table 17.2-1]. Thus, if the gain of the medium is
sufficiently large, the refractive-index discontinuity can itself serve as an adequate
reflective surface and no external mirrors are necessary. For GaAs, for example, n =
3.6, so that (18.3-2) yields R = 0.32.

18.3 LASERDIODES 833

Resonator Losses
The principal source of loss in the Fabry—Perot resonator arises from the partial reflec-
tion at the surface of the crystal. This loss constitutes the transmitted useful laser light.
For a resonator of length d, the reflection loss coefficient is [see (11.1-22)]

+ 1 1 1 (18.3-3)

ат, =a ата = — Ш| —— ]; .3-
т mi m2 2d Ri Ro ’

if the two surfaces have the same reflectances R; = Ry = Х, thena,, = (1/d) In(1/R).
The total loss coefficient is

Ar = а; + Am, (18.3-4)
where a, represents other sources of loss, including free-carrier absorption in the
semiconductor material (Fig. 17.2-2) and scattering from optical inhomogeneities. The
quantity a, increases as the concentration of impurities and interfacial imperfections
in heterostructures increase. It can attain values in the range 10 to 100 cm™*.

Of course, the term —ca in the expression for the gain coefficient (18.3-1), corre-
sponding to absorption in the material, also contributes substantially to the losses. This
contribution is accounted for, however, in the net peak gain coefficient y, given by
(18.3-1). This is apparent from the expression for Yo(v) given in (17.2-24), which is
proportional to f,(v) = fe(v) — fa(v) (.е., to stimulated emission less absorption).

Another important contribution to the loss results from the spread of optical energy
outside the active layer of the amplifier (in the direction perpendicular to the junction
plane). This can be especially detrimental if the thickness of the active layer [ is
small. The light then propagates through a thin amplifying layer (the active region)
surrounded by a lossy medium so that large losses are likely. This problem may be
alleviated by the use of a double heterostructure (Sec. 18.2C and Fig. 18.2-8), in which
the middle layer is fabricated from a material of elevated refractive index that acts as a
waveguide confining the optical energy.

Losses caused by optical spread may be phenomenologically accounted for by defin-
ing a confinement factor Г to represent the fraction of the optical energy lying within
the active region, as illustrated in Fig. 18.3-2.

| 1 >
Refractive a 1 _
index № №
it * | *
(a) * (b) *
Figure 18.3-2 Spatial spread of the laser light in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the
junction for: (a) homostructure, and (6) heterostructure lasers.
Assuming that the energy outside the active region is totally wasted, Г is therefore the
factor by which the gain coefficient is reduced, or equivalently, the factor by which the

834 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
loss coefficient is increased. Equation (18.3-4) must therefore be modified to reflect
this increase, so that
1
ap = ples + Qm). (18.3-5)

There are three types of simple laser-diode structures based on the mechanism used
to confine the carriers or light in the transverse (or lateral) direction (i.e., in the junction
plane): broad-area (in which there is no mechanism for transverse confinement), gain-
guided (in which transverse variations of the gain are used for confinement), and
index-guided (in which transverse refractive-index variations are used for confine-
ment).

Gain Condition: Laser Threshold
The laser oscillation condition is that the gain exceed the loss, y, > a, as indicated in
(16.1-12). The threshold gain coefficient is therefore a,. Setting yp = a, and J = J,
in (18.3-1) corresponds to a threshold injected current density „Л, given by
т“, (18.3-6)
а Threshold Current Density
where the transparency current density,
el
Jy = — Any, (18.3-7)
Transparency Current Density
is the current density that just makes the medium transparent. The threshold current
density is larger than the transparency current density by the factor (a, + a@)/a, which
is © 1 when a > a,. Since the current 1 = JA, where A = wd is the cross-sectional
area of the active region, we can define 1; = Л, А and & = ЛА, corresponding
to the currents required to achieve transparency of the medium and laser-oscillation
threshold, respectively.

The threshold current density J, is a key parameter in characterizing the laser-diode
performance; smaller values of J; indicate superior performance. In accordance with
(18.3-6) and (18.3-7), J 1s minimized by maximizing the internal quantum efficiency
7:;; and by minimizing the resonator loss coefficient a,, the transparency injected-
carrier concentration An,, and the active-region thickness [. As [1$ reduced beyond a
certain point, however, the loss coefficient a, becomes larger because the confinement
factor Г decreases [see (18.3-5)]. Consequently, J, decreases with decreasing / until it
reaches a minimum value, beyond which any further reduction causes J, to increase
(see Fig. 18.3-3). In double-heterostructure lasers, however, the confinement factor
remains near unity for lower values of [ because the active layer behaves as an optical
waveguide (see Fig. 18.3-2). The result is a lower minimum value of J, as shown in
Fig. 18.3-3, and therefore superior performance. The reduction in Л is illustrated in
the following examples.

Because the parameters An, and a in (18.3-1) are temperature dependent, so too are
the threshold current density J, and the frequency of peak gain. Temperature control
can be used to stabilize the laser output and to modify the output frequency.

18.3 LASERDIODES 835
Homostructure
-
= Double
5 heterostructure y, Figure 18.3-3 Dependence of the threshold
= 7 current density J, on the thickness of the active
Е 7 layer /. The double-heterostructure laser exhibits a
5 я 4 lower value of J, than the homostructure laser, and
3 7 therefore superior performance. The increase of J;
FA ye at small values of [ is a result of the reduction in
Е , 7 confinement for thin active layers.
7
Active-layer thickness /

ПИ
EXAMPLE 18.3-1. Threshold Current for an InGaAsP Homostructure Laser Diode.
Consider an InGaAsP homostructure Fabry—Perot laser diode with the same material parameters as
in Examples 18.2-1 and 18.2-2: Ang = 1.25 x 1018 cm~3, a = 600 ст- 1, т, = 2.5 ns, n = 3.5, and
7}: = 0.5 at T = 300° К. Assume that the dimensions of the junction are 4 = 200 um, w = 10 ppm,
and | = 2 ym. The current density necessary for transparency is then calculated to be J = 3.2 x 10+
А/ст?. We now determine the threshold current density for laser oscillation. Using (18.3-2), the
surface reflectance is R = 0.31. The corresponding mirror loss coefficient is ат = (1/d) In(1/R) =
59 cm~!. Assuming that the loss coefficient due to other effects is also vw, = 59 cm~! and that the
confinement factor Г я 1, the total loss coefficient is then a, = 118 cm~!. The threshold current
density is therefore J, = [(a, + а) /а] Jp = [(118 + 600) /600][3.2 x 104] = 3.8 x 104 A/cm?. The
corresponding threshold current 7, = J,wd = 760 mA, which is rather high. Homostructure lasers
are rarely used because of the difficulties of achieving CW operation without cooling to dissipate
heat.
EXAMPLE 18.3-2. Threshold Current for an InGaAsP Heterostructure Laser Diode.
We turn now to an InGaAsP/InP double-heterostructure Fabry—Perot laser diode (see Fig. 18.2-8)
with the same parameters and dimensions as in Example 18.3-1 except for the active-layer thickness,
which is now taken to be [ = 0.1 jum instead of 2 jum. If the confinement of light is assumed to be
perfect (Г = 1), we may use the same values for the resonator loss coefficient a,. The transparency
current density is then reduced by a factor of 20 to become Jy = 1600 A/cm?, and the threshold
current density assumes a more reasonable value of Л, = 1915 A/cm?. The corresponding threshold
current is 7, = 38 mA. It is this significant reduction in threshold current that made CW operation of
the double-heterostructure laser diode feasible at room temperature.
«ПИ
В. Power and Efficiency
Internal Photon Flux
When the laser current density is increased above its threshold value (i.e., J > Л), the
amplifier peak gain coefficient y, exceeds the loss coefficient a,. Stimulated emission
then outweighs absorption and other resonator losses so that oscillation can begin
and the photon flux ® in the resonator can increase. As with other homogeneously
broadened lasers, saturation sets in as the photon flux becomes larger and the popu-
lation difference becomes depleted [see (16.1-2)]. As shown in Fig. 16.2-1, the gain
coefficient then decreases until it becomes equal to the loss coefficient, whereupon
steady state is reached.

As with the internal photon-flux density and the internal photon-number density
considered for other types of lasers [see (16.2-2) and (16.2-13)], the steady-state inter-
nal photon flux ® is proportional to the difference between the pumping rate А and the

836 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
threshold pumping rate R,. Since К « i and К, сх i, in accordance with (18.2-8), Ф
may be written as
ml, [1 t-te
— |-—-1]) =m%—, t>1
Ф -| е (; ) ne ' (18.3-8)
ВР Steady-State
< и.
0, est Internal Photon Flux
Thus, the steady-state laser internal photon flux (photons/s generated within the active
region) is equal to the electron flux (injected electrons/s) in excess of that required for
threshold, multiplied by the internal quantum efficiency 7;.
The internal laser power above threshold is simply related to the internal photon flux
Ф by the relation Р = hv 9, so that we obtain
1.24
Pw nili-is)—, (18.3-9)
Xo Internal Laser Power
A, (ym), Р (№), # (A)
where Ло is expressed in jm, 7 in amperes, and P in watts.
Output Photon Flux and Efficiency
The laser output photon flux ®, is the product of the internal photon flux ® and the
extraction efficiency 7, [see (16.2-16)], which is the ratio of the loss associated with
the useful light transmitted through the mirrors to the total resonator loss a,.. If only
the light transmitted through mirror 1 is used, then 7. = @ил / С; on the other hand, if
the light transmitted through both mirrors is used, then 7. = Q,/a,. In the latter case,
if both mirrors have the same reflectance Х, we obtain пе = [(1/d) In(1/R)]/a,. The
laser output photon flux is therefore given by
®, = neni —*. (18.3-10)
е Laser Output Photon Flux
The proportionality between the laser output photon flux and the injected electron
flux above threshold set forth in (18.3-10) is governed by a quantity known as the
external differential quantum efficiency,
Nd = NeNi . (18.3-11)
External Differential
Quantum Efficiency
The quantity 77а thus represents the rate of change of the output photon flux with respect
to the injected electron flux above threshold,
d®,
= —.. 18.3-12

18.3 LASERDIODES 837
It is related to the differential power-conversion efficiency (slope efficiency) set forth
in (16.2-20) via
eV
Na = hp "8. (18.3-13)
и
When hy = eV, as is usually the case, we have nq = 1.
The laser output power above threshold is P, = hv®, = na(i — i¢)(hv/e), which
is written more simply as
1.24
Py = nai — i4) —, (18.3-14)
Xo Laser Output Power
Ao (um), Po (W), 4 (A)
when Ло is expressed in yum. This relationship is called the light—current (L-i) curve.
The slope of this curve above threshold is known as the differential responsivity of
the laser, which is usually specified in units of W/A:
dP, 1.24 .
Rg = т. [Ao (um), Po (W), 7 (A)] (18.3-15)
di Ао
Light-current curves for two laser diodes are displayed as the solid curves in
Fig. 18.3-4: (a) a gain-guided MQW InGaAsP/InGaAsP device operating at 1550 nm;
and (b) a MQW GaN/InGaN device operating at 405 nm. The theoretical fits provided
by (18.3-14) are shown as dashed curves.
oo 2 у oo Fa
Е р и Е 5 Ideal /
a 24 Ideal /’ ae 48 р
5 20 / 5 40 / GaN /InGaN
8 16 ру InGaAsP /InGaAsP 8. 32
un} Vy, з
3 12 у 8 24
а 5
sy 8 5 16
В В
6 4 6 8
0 0
0 40 80 120 160 200 0 20 40 60 80 100
Drive current i (mA) Drive current i (mA)
(a) (b)
Figure 18.3-4 Measured (solid) and ideal (dashed) light—current curves for: (a) а gain-guided
MQW InGaAsP/InGaAsP laser diode operated at a wavelength of 1550 nm in the near infrared
(the device structure is exhibited in Fig. 18.4-4); (5) а MQW GaN/InGaN laser diode operated at a
wavelength of 405 nm in the violet. Nonlinearities, which are not accounted for by the simple theory,
cause the optical output power to saturate.
The parameters associated with these laser diodes are readily extracted by making
use of (18.3-14) and (18.3-15); their values are presented in Table 18.3-1. Though
the external differential quantum efficiency 7g is nearly identical for both devices, the
differential responsivity Ка is about a factor of four greater for the GaN /InGaN device
by virtue of its shorter operating wavelength, as is readily understood from (18.3-15).

838 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Table 18.3-1 MQW laser-diode operating parameters extracted from the infrared and violet light—
current curves displayed in Figs. 18.3-4(a) and (5), respectively.
Material Xo (nm) i, (MA) Na Ка (W/A)
InGaAsP /InGaAsP 1550 15 0.33 0.26
GaN /InGaN 405 35 0.33 1.0
The power-conversion efficiency (or wall-plug efficiency) 7, is defined as the ratio
of the emitted laser light power P, to the electrical input power P, = 4", where У is
the forward-bias voltage applied to the diode. Since P, = na(i — i4)(hv/e), we have
и \ Av
Ne = па (1 = :) — (18.3-16)
i} eV Power-Conversion
Efficiency
For operation well above threshold, so that i >> i, and for eV = hv, we obtain 7 =
nq. Laser diodes can exhibit power-conversion efficiencies in excess of 70%, which is
well above that for LEDs (Table 18.1-1) and for other types of lasers (Table 16.3-1).
The electrical power that is not transformed into light is transformed into heat. Because
laser diodes do, in fact, generate substantial amounts of heat they are usually mounted
on heat sinks, which help to dissipate the heat and stabilize the temperature.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 18.3-3. Comparison of Efficiencies for Multiquantum-Well and Double-
Heterostructure InGaAsP Laser Diodes. Consider once again Example 18.3-2 for the
InGaAsP/InP double-heterostructure Fabry—Perot laser diode with у; = 0.5, Am = 59 cm7!,
ay = 118 ст` *, and i, = 38 mA. If the light from both output faces is used, the extraction efficiency
iS Ne = Qm/a, = 0.5, while the external differential quantum efficiency is ny = пет: = 0.25.
At A, = 1300 nm, the differential responsivity of this laser is Ка = dP,/di = 0.24 W/A. If, for
example, 1 = 50 mA, we have 7 — i, = 12 mA and P, = 12 x 0.24 = 2.9 mW. Comparison of these
numbers with those reported in Fig. 18.3-4(a) and Table 18.3-1 fora MQW InGaAsP/InGaAsP laser
diode operated at 1550 nm reveals that the MQW laser has a lower threshold current and a higher
external differential quantum efficiency than the double-heterostructure laser, as expected.
«ПИ
Зиттагу
There are four efficiencies associated with laser diodes:
= The internal quantum efficiency 77; = r,/r = т/т,, which accounts for the
fact that only a fraction of the electron—hole recombinations are radiative.
= The extraction efficiency 7-, which accounts for the fact that only a portion
of the light lost from the cavity is useful.
= The external differential quantum efficiency ng = Пе, which accounts for
both of the above effects.
= The power-conversion (wall-plug) efficiency 7., which is the ratio of the
emitted optical power to the electrical power supplied to the device.
The differential responsivity Ка (W/A) is also a useful measure of performance.

18.3 LASERDIODES 839
Comparison of LED, SLED, and LD Efficiencies and Powers
It is of interest to compare the efficiencies and optical powers associated with LEDs,
SLEDs, and LDs. When operated below threshold, laser diodes produce spontaneous
emission and behave as light-emitting diodes (Sec. 18.1). Indeed, the presence of
spontaneous emission can be discerned at low currents in LD light—current curves.

The four efficiencies attendant to LD operation have been highlighted in the sum-
mary above. There are also four efficiencies associated with LEDs, as discussed in
Sec. 18.1. These are the internal quantum efficiency 7;, which accounts for the fact
that only a fraction of the electron-hole recombinations are radiative in nature; the
transmittance efficiency уе, which accounts for the fact that only a fraction of the
light generated in the junction region can escape from the high-index semiconductor
medium; the external efficiency ex = Те, which accounts for both of the foregoing
effects; and the power-conversion efficiency с. The responsivity К is also used as a
measure of LED performance.

There are one-to-one correspondences between the quantities 7, Пе, and 7. for the
LED and the LD, respectively. Furthermore, there are correspondences between 7ех
and 7а, К and Ва, and т and (i — 7) for the LED and the LD, respectively. The superior
performance of the laser results principally from the fact that 7. for the LD is greater
than that for the LED. This is because the laser operates on the basis of stimulated
emission, which causes the laser light to be concentrated in particular modes so that
it can be more readily extracted. The net result is that a laser diode operated above
threshold has a value of 774 that is typically larger than the value of 7.x for an LED.

Superluminescent laser diodes (SLEDs), which are operated with current injection
that is sufficiently strong so that stimulated emission dominates spontaneous emis-
sion, exhibit behavior intermediate between that of LEDs and LDs. As discussed in
Sec. 18.2E, feedback must be frustrated in these devices to avert lasing.

To forge a comparison for the performance of these three classes of devices, light—
current curves for a light-emitting diode, superluminescent diode, and laser diode
are provided in Fig. 18.3-5, at modest values of the drive current. All are MQW
InGaAsP/InP structures operating at a wavelength of 1600 nm. The responsivity and
efficiency of the LD are substantially greater than those of the other two devices.
Moreover, the light—-current curve of the SLED characteristically bends upward in
exponential fashion (as is apparent in the inset) whereas the LED and LD curves bend
downward at higher current levels as a result of saturation.

28
= 24 . :
= Figure 18.3-5 Light-current curves
a 20 for a light-emitting diode (LED), a
2 LD superluminescent diode (SLED), and a
E16 aL [LP SLED. laser diode (LD). All three devices are
21 и InGaAsP/InP MQW structures operated
Е р up ee” at a wavelength of 1600 nm, and at
Е 8 , рн modest values of the drive current. The
4 оо 240 inset provides an expanded view of the
LED ____SLED LED and SLED curves.
РО 160 20
Drive current i (mA)
C. Spectral and Spatial Characteristics
Spectral Characteristics
The spectral intensity of laser light is governed by three factors, as described in
Sec. 16.2B:

840 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

1. The bandwidth B over which the active medium small-signal gain coefficient
Yo(v) is greater than the loss coefficient си...

2. The homogeneous or inhomogeneous nature of the line-broadening mechanism
(Sec. 14.3D).

3. The resonator modes, in particular the approximate frequency spacing between
the longitudinal modes ир = c/2d, where d is the resonator length.

The spectral intensity of light emitted by a semiconductor laser diode, in particular, is
characterized by the following three features:

1. The spectral width of the gain coefficient is relatively large because transitions
occur between two energy bands rather than between two discrete energy levels.

2. Intraband processes are fast so that semiconductors tend to be homogeneously
broadened. Nevertheless, spatial hole burning permits the simultaneous oscil-
lation of many longitudinal modes (Sec. 16.2B). Spatial hole burning is particu-
larly prevalent in short cavities in which there are few standing-wave cycles. This
permits the fields of different longitudinal modes, which are distributed along
the resonator axis, to overlap less, thereby allowing partial spatial hole burning
to occur.

3. The semiconductor resonator length d is significantly smaller than that of most
other types of lasers. The frequency spacing of adjacent resonator modes vp =
c/2d is therefore relatively large. Nevertheless, many such modes can generally
be supported within the broad bandwidth B over which the small-signal gain ex-
ceeds the loss [the number of possible laser modes is М = B/vp, in accordance
with (16.2-23)].

ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 18.3-4. Number of Longitudinal Modes т an InGaAsP Laser Diode. Ап
InGaAsP crystal (п = 3.5) of length d = 400 wm has Fabry-Perot resonator modes spaced
by vp = c/2d = co/2nd = 107 GHz. Near the central wavelength Л. = 1300 nm, this
frequency spacing corresponds to a free-space wavelength spacing Ar, where Ак/Аь = к/р,
so that \p = Ajur/v = \2/2nd = 0.6 nm. If the spectral width В = 1.2 THz (corresponding to a
wavelength width Ал = 7 nm), then approximately 11 longitudinal modes may oscillate. A typical
spectral-intensity pattern consisting of a single transverse mode and about 11 longitudinal modes is
illustrated in Fig. 18.3-6. The linewidth of individual longitudinal modes is typically of the order of
tens of MHz for index-guided lasers and a few GHz for gain-guided lasers. The overall spectral width
of light emitted by laser diodes is greater than that of most other lasers (see Table 15.3-1). To reduce
the number of modes to one within the confines of a Fabry—Perot structure, the resonator length d
would have to be reduced so that В = c/2d, requiring a cavity of length d ~ 36 um.
>|), =0.6nm
|
1290 1300 1310 Wavelength \,, (nm)

Figure 18.3-6 Spectral intensity of a 1300-nm InGaAsP index-guided buried-heterostructure laser.
This distribution is considerably narrower, and differs in shape, from that of a A, ~ 1300-nm
InGaAsP LED (see Fig. P18.1-5). The number of modes decreases as the injection current increases;
the mode closest to the gain maximum increases in power while the side peaks saturate. (Adapted
from R. J. Nelson, R. B. Wilson, P. D. Wright, P. A. Barnes, and N. K. Dutta, CW Electrooptical
Properties of InGaAsP (A = 1.3 ит) Buried-Heterostructure Lasers, IEEE Journal of Quantum
Electronics, vol. QE-17, pp. 202—207, Fig. 6 ©1981 IEEE.)
ПОНИ

18.3 LASERDIODES 841
Comparison of LED, SLED, and LD Spectral Intensities
The spectral intensities for an InGaAsP/InP light-emitting diode, a superluminescent
diode, and a laser diode are compared in Fig. 18.3-7. The spectral narrowing associated
with stimulation emission is evident in the SLED curve, and even more so in the LD
curve.
ED Figure 18.3-7 Normalized spectral in-
! tensities for a light-emitting diode (LED),
i | \ SLED a superluminescent diode (SLED), and a
H \ laser diode (LD). All three devices are
и A InGaAsP/InP structures operating at a
yi ‘ wavelength of 1600 nm. The LED has
7 } \ LED a broad spectrum, the LD has a narrow
pea i Ne spectrum, and the SLED has a spectrum of
-—" i ‘. Tt: intermediate width.
14 15 1.6 17 18 Л (um)
Spatial Characteristics
As with other Fabry—Perot lasers, oscillation in laser diodes takes the form of transverse
and longitudinal modes. In Sec. 16.2C, the indices (1, т) were used to characterize the
spatial distributions in the transverse direction, while the index 4 was used to represent
variation along the direction of wave propagation or temporal behavior. In most other
types of lasers, the laser beam resides totally within the active medium so that the
spatial distributions of the different modes are determined by the shapes of the mirrors
and their separations. For circularly symmetric systems, the transverse modes can be
represented in terms of Hermite-Gaussian or Laguerre—Gaussian beams (Sec. 11.20).
However, the situation is different in laser diodes since the laser beam extends outside
the active layer. The transverse modes (also called spatial modes) are therefore modes
of the dielectric waveguide created by the different layers of the laser diode.

The transverse modes can be determined by using the theory presented in Sec. 9.3
for an optical waveguide with rectangular cross section of dimensions / and w. If 1/Ло
is sufficiently small, the waveguide will admit only a single mode in the transverse
direction perpendicular to the junction plane. However, w is usually larger than Ло, so
that the waveguide will support several modes in the direction parallel to the plane of
the junction, as illustrated in Fig. 18.3-8. Modes in the direction parallel to the junction
plane are called transverse modes or lateral modes. The larger the ratio и/Ло, the
greater the number of transverse modes possible.

Figure 18.3-8 Schematic illustration of optical-intensity spatial distributions for the laser
waveguide modes (1, m) = (1, 1), (1, 2), and (1,3).

842 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Far-Field Radiation Pattern
An edge-emitting laser diode with an active layer of dimensions | and w emits light
with far-field angular divergence = Ло/1 (radians) in the plane perpendicular to the
junction and = A,/w in the plane parallel to the junction, as illustrated in Fig. 18.3-
9. This is similar to the results for a Gaussian beam of diameter 2Wo, provided in
(3.1-21), for which the divergence angle is 9 = (2/7)(A,/2Wo) = Ao/tWo when
9 < 1. The angular divergence determines the far-field radiation pattern, as discussed
in Sec. 4.3. Because of the small size of its active layer, the laser diode is characterized
by an angular divergence larger than that of most other lasers. As an example, for [ = 2
pum, ми = 10 pm, and A, = 800 nm, the divergence angles are calculated to be = 23°
and 5°. Light from a single-transverse-mode laser diode, for which w is smaller, has an
even larger angular divergence. The spatial distribution of the far-field light within the
radiation cone depends on the number of transverse modes and on their optical powers.
The highly asymmetric elliptical distribution of laser-diode light emitted from such a
device can make collimation tricky.
Ло
a
a Te]
\G/
iw 1 Figure 18.3-9 _Angular distribution of the
| optical beam emitted from an edge-emitting
I— laser diode. The directions perpendicular and
parallel to the plane of the junction are called
| the fast axis and slow axis, respectively (not
to be confused with designations of the same
name that relate to polarization).
Single-Mode Operation: DBR and DFB Laser Diodes
Because higher-order transverse modes have a wider spatial spread, they are less con-
fined; their loss coefficient a, is therefore greater than that for lower-order modes.
Consequently, some of the highest-order modes will fail to satisfy the oscillation con-
ditions; others will oscillate at a lower power than the fundamental (lowest-order)
mode. To achieve high-power single-spatial-mode operation, the number of waveguide
modes must be reduced. This can be done by decreasing the dimensions of the active-
layer cross section ([ and w) so that it acts as a single-mode waveguide. The attendant
reduction of the junction area also has the effect of reducing the threshold current.
Higher-order transverse modes may also be eliminated by making use of gain-guided
or index-guided laser-diode configurations.

Operation on a single longitudinal mode, which produces a single-frequency output,
may be achieved by reducing the length d of the resonator so that the frequency spacing
between adjacent longitudinal modes, 1.е., the Fabry—Perot free spectral range vp =
c/2d, exceeds the spectral width of the amplifying medium. Single-mode operation
may also be attained by making use of multiple-mirror resonators, as discussed in
Sec. 16.2D and illustrated in Fig. 16.2-15.

Another approach for achieving single-frequency operation involves the use of dis-
tributed reflectors in place of the cleaved crystal surfaces that serve as lumped mirrors
in the Fabry—Perot configuration. When feedback of this type is provided, the surfaces
of the crystal are antireflection coated to suppress the Fabry—Perot modes. As an exam-
ple, wavelength-selective reflectors such as Bragg gratings can be placed in the plane

18.3 LASERDIODES 843
of the junction [Fig. 18.3-10(а)]. As discussed in Secs. 2.4B and 7.1C, a Bragg grating
reflects light when the grating period A satisfies A = а^/2, where 4 is an integer. The
device portrayed in Fig. 18.3-10(a) is called a distributed Bragg reflector laser or,
more simply, a DBR laser. Alternatively, a DBR grating placed below or above the
active region can also serve as a distributed reflector, as illustrated in Fig. 18.3-10(5).

Yet another method for providing wavelength-dependent feedback makes use of a
corrugated region between the active and guiding layers, as shown in Fig. 18.3-10(©);
this results in a periodic refractive index and therefore a grating. Structures of this
kind are known as distributed-feedback lasers or, for short, DFB lasers. This class of
lasers offers single-frequency operation that is robust in the presence of drive-current
variations, operating-temperature variations, and the presence of modulation. More-
over, DFB lasers offer narrow spectral widths, large modulation bandwidths, and low
noise (the DFB configuration avoids partition noise arising from competition among
longitudinal modes in Fabry—Perot lasers). Consequently, DFB lasers are widely used,
including as sources for optical fiber communication systems in the 1300-1600-пт
wavelength range (Sec. 18.4A).

MQW DBR MQW.
active region grating active region
= E/T
grating
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 18.3-10 (a) Schematic diagram of a distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) multiquantum-well
laser diode with DBR mirrors outside the active region. (6) Diagram of a distributed feedback (DFB)
multiquantum-well laser diode with a DBR structure that resides below the active region and serves as
a distributed reflector. (c) Structure for a distributed feedback (DFB) multiquantum-well laser diode,
which incorporates a corrugation between the active and guiding layers that acts as a distributed
reflector.
Linewidth-enhancement factor. The linewidth Av, of the light emitted by a single-
mode semiconductor laser exceeds the Schawlow—Townes linewidth Ант, which
accommodates the random-phase spontaneous-emission contributions that combine
with the laser-oscillation mode (Sec. 16.2D). The increased linewidth is a result of
the coupling between phase and intensity changes that arises from the effects of the
semiconductor carrier density on its refractive index. This coupling is represented by
a linewidth-enhancement factor a, which is the constant of proportionality between
changes in the phase and the field gain. A typical MQW РЕВ laser has a linewidth-
enhancement factor © = 4.5 at an output power of 10 mW; quantum-dot devices
have smaller values of a. The laser-diode linewidth is a factor of (1 + а)? larger
than the conventional laser linewidth, so that the Schawlow—Townes linewidth for a
single-mode laser diode is given by Avg, = л(1 + а)? hv (5v)?/P,.
External-Cavity Wavelength-Tunable Laser Diodes
There are many circumstances in which it is advantageous to be able to tune the
output wavelength of a single-mode laser diode. One prominent example is in a co-
herent optical communication system, whose operation requires a tunable local osc-
illator (Sec. 25.4). Other examples include wavelength-division multiplexed (WDM)
systems (Sec. 25.3C), systems involving wavelength conversion, and spectroscopic
applications. The wavelength at which a LD operates can be changed, for example,
by modifying the refractive index of the active medium. This can be implemented via
various physical mechanisms, such as carrier injection, the application of an electric
field, or temperature modification.

844 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

However, it is far more convenient to achieve tuning by placing the die in an external
cavity that incorporates a wavelength-selective element (see Sec. 16.2D). Aside from
allowing the output wavelength to be tuned, this approach concomitantly yields a
salutary reduction in its spectral width. In the Littman—Metcalf configuration illustrated
in Fig. 18.3-11, the die has a highly reflective coating on one of its ends and an
antireflection coating on the other. A collimating lens and an external mirror complete
the cavity, into which is inserted a wavelength-selective element, usually a stationary
diffraction grating. The output wavelength may then be tuned over the spectral width B
where net gain is available by rotating the mirror that reflects the first-order diffracted
beam back to the laser diode. A particular merit of the Littman—Metcalf configuration
is that the direction of the output beam remains fixed as the wavelength is tuned. An
analogous fiber-optic configuration incorporates a fiber Bragg grating (FBG).

№ Output
Reflective Antireflection he ff
coating coating . .
\ ) Diffraction Figure 18.3-11 Littman—Metcalf config-
grating uration for a tunable external-cavity laser
— | 2 diode. The output wavelength is tuned Бу
Laser diode Vig rotating the mirror.

External-cavity laser diodes are readily mode-locked since a saturable absorber
(Sec. 15.4A) can be easily inserted in the cavity to achieve passive mode locking.
Mode-locked external-cavity laser diodes offer advantages over mode-locked fiber
lasers in certain applications (e.g., optical fiber communications).

18.4 QUANTUM-CONFINED LASERS
Quantum-confined lasers, in which carriers are confined to dimensions smaller than
the de Broglie wavelength of а thermalized electron (Лав = 50 nm in GaAs), are
the workhorses of the family of laser diodes. Confinement of the electron momen-
tum in 0, 1, 2, and 3 dimensions corresponds to bulk, quantum-well, quantum-wire,
and quantum-dot configurations, respectively; the geometrical dimensionality of these
structures are 3, 2, 1, and 0, respectively, as depicted in Fig. 18.4-1. Bulk structures
have confinement in 0 dimensions and thus have a geometrical dimensionality of 3.
Quantum-dot structures have confinement in 3 dimensions and thus have a geomet-
rical dimensionality of 0. Convention dictates that quantum-confined structures be
designated by their geometrical dimensionality. Some of the elementary properties of
quantum-confined structures were set forth in Secs. 14.1D and 17.1G.
| | |
Confinement A, р yy й р
\ —/ —4 S|) === [= Е,
ig О НИ ПО И
Substrate $ Quantum-well film Quantum-wire Quantum-dot
- active region active region active region
(@) (b) ©)
Figure 18.4-1 Schematic representation of several quantum-confined laser configurations:
(a) quantum-well laser (2D); (6) quantum-wire laser (1D); and (с) quantum-dot laser (OD). Charge
carriers are restricted to the active region by confinement layers while Bragg reflectors serve as
mirrors.

18.4 QUANTUM-CONFINED LASERS 845

The dimensionality of a quantum-confined device governs the behavior of the laser
gain coefficient, threshold current, external differential quantum efficiency, and output
linewidth. In general, a decrease in the geometrical dimensionality leads to a reduc-
tion of the active volume, and thus to a reduction of the output power, especially
for quantum-wire and quantum-dot lasers. In this section, we discuss quantum-well,
quantum-wire, and quantum-dot semiconductor lasers in turn. We then turn to quantum
cascade lasers, which are multiquantum-well devices that generate substantial optical
power in the infrared and THz spectral regions.

A. Quantum-Well and Multiquantum-Well Lasers

We have already encountered several examples of quantum-well and multiquantum-
well structures earlier, in connection with LEDs, SOAs, SLEDs, and LDs. As discussed
in Secs. 18.2 and 18.3, the performance of the single-quantum-well (SQW) device
portrayed in Fig. 18.4-1(a) is superior to that of the double-heterostructure (DH) de-
vice. The benefit accrues from the small thickness of a single quantum well, which is
typically < 10 nm; this is to be compared with ап active-region thickness of = 100 nm
for a DH laser diode and = 2 ит for an old-fashioned homojunction device.

The dependences of the peak gain coefficient y, on the current density J for SQW
and bulk DH laser diodes are compared in Fig. 18.4-2. The SQW laser requires a far
smaller value of the current density „Л, to achieve transparency. Its peak gain coefficient
increases sharply at first but then saturates at multiples of the maximum gain coefficient
Ym [see (18.2-13)].
= Figure 18.4-2 Peak gain coef-
5 ficient y, versus current density
в 2 >” | J for SQW and bulk DH laser

8 SQW Bulk DH diodes. The quantum-well laser

Я y, b---== has a far smaller transparency cur-

2 rent density „Лг; however, its gain

5. coefficient saturates at a lower
Ут Ir Current density J level.

The single-quantum-well laser offers the following salutary features in comparison
with its double-heterostructure counterpart:

= Smaller threshold current density

= Larger external differential quantum efficiency

= Larger power-conversion efficiency

= Narrower gain-coefficient width

= Smaller laser-mode linewidth

= Reduced temperature dependence

= Faster response and thus greater modulation frequencies

The multiquantum-well (MQW) laser, schematized in Fig. 18.4-3, offers a greater
gain coefficient than the single-quantum-well laser. Indeed, the gain coefficient of a
MQW laser with N wells is N times that of each of its wells. Multiquantum-well
lasers offer excellent performance and are in fact the most commonly used of all laser
diodes. They find extensive use in all manner of applications, and comprise the lion’s
share of the device structures discussed in this section and in Sec. 18.5.

However, to effect a fair comparison of the performance of SQW and MQW devices,
the pumping level should be taken to be the same in both. Consider a single quantum
well injected with an excess carrier density An and a peak gain coefficient y,. In the

846 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
Figure 18.4-3 Schematic of the active
(— region of a multiquantum-well laser. The
Confinement confinement layers restrict charge carriers to
layers | the quantum-well region.
Multiquantum-well
active region
comparison MQW structure, each of the N wells would then be injected with only
An/N carriers. Because of the nonlinear dependence of the gain on An, the gain
coefficient of each well would then be &y,/N, where € could be smaller or greater
than unity, depending on the operating conditions. The total gain provided by the MQW
laser would thus be N(€y,/N) = &уь. It turns out that the performance of the MQW
device is typically inferior at low current densities but superior at high current densities,
but by a factor smaller than М.
Strained-Layer Quantum-Well Lasers
The introduction of mechanical strain can provide a salutary effect on the perfor-
mance of laser diodes, in spite of the fact that the notion is counterintuitive. Strained-
layer lasers are widely used because of their superior properties. Quantum-confined
strained-layer lasers have been fabricated in many material systems (including Ш-У,
IUJ-nitride, and SiGe) using various configurations, and operated at many wavelengths.
Rather than being lattice-matched to the confining layers, the active region is deliber-
ately chosen to have a different lattice constant. If sufficiently thin, it can accommodate
its atomic spacings to those of the surrounding layers, and in the process become
mechanically strained. If the active region is too thick, however, it will not properly
accommodate and the material will develop defects and imperfections that render it
unusable. The InGaAs active layer in an AlGaAs/InGaAs strained-layer quantum-well
laser, for example, has a free-standing lattice constant that is significantly greater than
that of its AlGaAs confining layers. The thin InGaAs layer is therefore subjected to
biaxial compression in the plane of the layer, while its atomic spacings are increased
above their nominal values in the direction perpendicular to the layer. Conversely, an
active layer with a free-standing lattice constant smaller than that of the confining lay-
ers would be subjected to biaxial tension in the plane of the layer and would experience
decreased atomic spacings in the perpendicular direction.

Compressive strain can alter the band structure in three significant ways: (1) it in-
creases the bandgap E,; (2) it removes the degeneracy at К = 0 between the heavy and
light hole bands; and (3) it makes the valence bands anisotropic so that the highest band
has a light effective mass in the direction parallel to the plane of the layer and a heavy
effective mass in the perpendicular direction. These features can serve to significantly
improve the performance of quantum-well lasers. First, the laser wavelength is altered
by virtue of the dependence of Е, on the strain. Second, the laser threshold current
density can be reduced by the presence of the strain, which may be understood in terms
of the following argument: achieving a population inversion requires that the separation
of the quasi-Fermi levels be greater than the bandgap energy, 1.е., Er, — Ey, > E,, as
set forth in (17.2-12); the reduced hole mass allows Ey, to more readily descend into
the valence band, thereby permitting this condition to be satisfied at lower values of
injection current. Indeed, we have already seen that strain can have an outsize effect
on the performance of a photonic device; the Ge laser can operate only in its presence
(Example 17.2-1).

18.4 QUANTUM-CONFINED LASERS 847
Materials and Device Structures
Most semiconductor lasers in use today make use of active regions that comprise
quantum-confined structures. We begin by considering several types of conventional
multiquantum-well laser diodes; these lasers find use in a whole host of applications
ranging from consumer products such as laser printers and data-storage devices to long-
haul optical fiber communication systems. They also serve as highly efficient optical
pumps for optical fiber amplifiers, fiber lasers, and solid-state lasers. The materials and
device structures for most conventional laser diodes closely resemble those used for
light-emitting diodes (Sec. 18.1C). Direct-bandgap ternary and quaternary materials
are used in the near-infrared to mid-ultraviolet region because their bandgap wave-
lengths can be compositionally tuned. As with LEDs, AlInGaN, AlInGaP, InGaAs,
and InGaAsP are particularly important quaternary materials.

Laser diodes are commonly available at the following wavelengths: 635, 650, 680,
and 780 nm for use in laser pointers, optical storage and display systems, and short-haul
plastic-fiber communication systems; 850 nm for short-haul silica-fiber communica-
tion systems; and 1300-1600 nm for long-haul silica-fiber communication systems.
Typical wavelengths used for diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) and diode-pumped
fiber lasers are 793 nm (AlGaAs) for thulium-doped silica fiber; 808 and 880 nm
(AlGaAs) for neodymium-doped yttrium vanadate and YAG; 940 nm (InGaAs) for
ytterbium-doped YAG and silica fiber; and 980 nm (InGaAs) for erbium-doped silica-
fiber lasers and amplifiers. Other wavelengths at which laser diodes are commonly
available include 375, 405, 440, 670, 785, 830, and 920 nm. Lead-salt laser diodes can
operate at wavelengths as long as about 30 ит, but they have been largely supplanted
by mid-infrared quantum cascade lasers.

Individual edge-emitting laser diodes can deliver optical powers that range from

milliwatts to tens of watts, with power-conversion efficiencies that can exceed 70%,
speeds in the vicinity of tens of GHz, and life spans of years.
Single-mode MQW lasers. Lasers that include a narrow waveguide, in the form of
a ridge or buried index step with a width between 2 and 5 ит, can accommodate only
a single spatial mode (Sec. 9.3). Such lasers are used when it is important to be able
to focus the laser beam to a diffraction-limited spot; applications include optical data
storage, printing, metrology, and optical fiber communications. The small waveguide
size in such devices limits the optical power to a maximum of about 1 W. When single
spatial mode MQW lasers have a Fabry—Perot resonator configuration, as for the ridge-
waveguide laser illustrated below, lasing generally occurs on multiple longitudinal
modes.

Operation on a single longitudinal-mode can be instituted by making use of a
distributed-feedback (DFB) configuration in place of the Fabry-Perot feedback. The
former provides feedback only at a single frequency, and DFB lasers have many other
salutary characteristics as well (Sec. 18.3C). The signal and pump sources for optical
fiber communication systems require the narrow frequency spectrum and low noise
offered by lasers that operate on a single spatial mode as well as a single longitudinal
mode. Lasers for this purpose generally provide milliwatts to watts of optical power
and are fiber-coupled. The buried-heterostructure DFB laser diode illustrated below is
a highly reliable device that fills the bill.

Ridge-waveguide Fabry-Perot laser. The ridge-waveguide (RW) laser diode op-
erates on a single spatial mode and can lase over a broad range of wavelengths. The
ridge waveguide provides weak optical waveguiding as well as gain guiding by re-
stricting current injection to the active region beneath the ridge. RW laser diodes often
take the form of a Fabry-Perot structure with cleaved facets. The 500-~wm-long device
displayed in Fig. 18.4-4 has an active region comprising six 7-nm-thick, compression-
strained InGaAsP quantum wells sandwiched between 10-nm-thick tension-strained

848 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
InGaAsP barriers. The laser diode depicted here has a threshold current 7, = 15
mA, an external differential quantum efficiency а = 0.33, a differential responsivity
Ra = 0.26 W/A, and emits 20 mW of optical power.
+
InGaAsP/InGaAsP
active vevion Figure 18.4-4 Schematic diagram of a
L conte hy а: strained-MQW InGaAsP/InGaAsP ridge-
{ _ waveguide laser diode that operates at 1550
Dielectric nm. The active region under the ridge is
surrounded on all sides by material of lower
refractive index so that the ridge constitutes
Г, an optical waveguide. This laser operates
cladding . > .
InGaAsP layers’ on a single spatial mode but on multiple
waveguide longitudinal modes. The light—current curve
gute ate for this device is displayed in Fig. 18.3-4(a).
Buried-heterostructure distributed-feedback laser. As illustrated in Fig. 18.4-
5, alternating p- and n-type layers allow current flow only in the vicinity of the active
region in this buried-heterostructure device, thereby enforcing lateral confinement. The
dielectric film provides gain guiding. The distributed feedback (DFB) component of
the device makes use of a corrugated-layer grating adjacent to the active region that
serves as a distributed reflector (Sec. 18.3C). Lasers such as these offer ample gain at
modest current levels, and can provide output powers as high as 1 W ша single spatial
and longitudinal mode. These devices offer narrow spectral widths, which is crucial
for the efficient operation of 1300-1600-пт wavelength-division-multiplexed (WDM)
communication systems, as discussed in Sec. 25.1B. Typical values of the threshold
current and differential responsivity are 7, < 10 mA and Ка = 0.4 W/A, respectively,
and Ам, is a few MHz.
+
Dielectric
n-InP an Figure 18.4-5 Buried-heterostructure
multiquantum-well DFB laser used for
__inP optical fiber communications in the 1300-
substrate .
1600-nm wavelength range. This laser
erating < operates оп а single spatial mode as well as
InGaAsP/InGaAsP on a single longitudinal mode.
MQW
active region
Multimode MQW lasers. _ If the width of the active region of a laser diode is broad-
ened from a few ит to, say, 200 ит, it can operate on multiple spatial modes and
deliver optical powers as high as 10 W. Devices of this kind are known as broad-
area laser diodes or broad-stripe laser diodes. The light from such lasers cannot be
focused to a diffraction-limited spot, nor can it be efficiently coupled into a single-
mode fiber, but it is suitable for applications such as pumping optical fiber amplifiers,
multi-clad fiber lasers, and diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers.

18.4 QUANTUM-CONFINED LASERS 849
Laser-diode bars and stacks. Yet higher laser powers may be obtained by configur-
ing multimode laser diodes into bars and stacks, which can serve as pumps for diode-
pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers (Sec. 16.3A) as well as for purposes such as direct
diode-laser materials processing. The usual bar comprises between 10 and 50 broad-
area laser diodes, contiguously arranged in a 1D array and integrated into a single
chip. A bar suitable for pumping a DPSS laser typically has a length of 1 cm, emits
100 W of partially coherent optical power, and has a power-conversion efficiency in
the vicinity of 50% (Example 16.3-1). Bars are often mounted in stacks, which com-
mensurately ramp up the optical power to kW levels. Powerful stacks developed at the
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) serve as pumps for the Nd**:glass
laser amplifiers in the HAPLS petawatt laser system. As detailed in Example 23.2-
3, an individual laser-diode stack containing more than 125 000 AlGaAs laser diodes
delivers 250-J pulses of 0.3-ms duration at a wavelength of 888 nm, with a peak power
of 800 kW and an average power of 2.5 kW, at a repetition rate of 10 pulses/s. The
stack consists of an array of 1600 bars, each of which emits 500 W, with a bar-to-bar
spacing of 350 т. The power-conversion efficiency of the stack is 7, = 60%.
B. Quantum-Wire and Multiquantum-Wire Lasers
Quantum wires (see Sec. 17.1G) can also serve as the active region of a semiconductor
laser, as illustrated in Fig. 18.4-1(6). Multiquantum-wire lasers comprise arrays of
quantum wires, as portrayed in Fig. 18.4-6. In principle, multiquantum-wire lasers
offer narrower linewidths than quantum-well lasers by virtue of their tighter carrier
confinement. However, the fabrication of Ш-У quantum-wire structures currently lags
behind that of quantum-well structures, in part because of the difficulty of creating a
sufficiently dense collection of wires, and hence so too does their performance.
a Figure 18.4-6 Schematic of the active
region of a multiquantum-wire laser. Light
| is ordinarily emitted in all directions; laser
S emission can be restricted to the end faces by
ow, making use of a suitable resonator.
Cladding Multiquantum-wire
active region
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 18.4-1. Performance Comparison of Multiquantum-Wire and Quantum-
Well Lasers. А collection of five 1-mm-long, 23-nm-wide, InGaAsP active-layer quantum wires,
clad with InP and spaced 80 nm apart, operates as a room-temperature CW multiquantum-wire laser
at a wavelength A, = 1550 nm. The threshold current, threshold current density, external differential
quantum efficiency, and power-conversion efficiency turn out to be i, = 140 mA, J, = 800 A/cm?,
na = 40%, and n. = 2%, respectively.’ As a result of the small volume of the active region and
the substantial optical losses, however, the performance of this multiquantum-wire laser is inferior to
that of a quantum-well laser fabricated from the same chip, which has operating parameters 7, = 100
mA, J, = 500 A/cm?, na = 50%, and пе = 6%.
«ПИ
1 See Н. Yagi, Т. Sano, К. Овна, О. Plumwongrot, Т. Maruyama, A. Haque, $. Tamura, and $. Arai,
GalInAsP/InP Partially Strain-Compensated Multiple-Quantum-Wire Lasers Fabricated by Dry Etching and
Regrowth Processes, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 43, pp. 3401-3409, 2004.

850 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

C. Quantum-Dot and Multiquantum-Dot Lasers

Quantum dots, occasionally called quantum boxes or nanocrystals, are semiconduc-
tor particles that can take the form of cubes, spheres, disks, pyramids, or other shapes.
They typically have dimensions in the range 1-50 nm (а 10-nm cube of GaAs contains
some 40 000 atoms). The carriers may be confined by cladding the dots with a semicon-
ductor of larger bandgap or by embedding them in glass or polymer. Figure 18.4-1(c)
depicts a quantum-dot. The growth and characteristics of quantum dots were discussed
in Sec. 14.1D and their energy levels were examined in Sec. 17.1G. The energy levels
of a quantum dot are those of its excitons. Though the levels are sharp as a result of
tight carrier confinement, they depend strongly on the size of the dot. As illustrated in
Fig. 14.1-13, the photoluminescence photon energy increases as the dot size decreases
because of the greater energy required to confine the semiconductor excitation to a
smaller volume (see Sec. 14.1D).

Since quantum dots can self-assemble into ordered arrangements, it is easier than
it might appear to construct a multiquantum-dot laser with an active region containing
many quantum dots, as depicted in Fig. 18.4-7. The first such device, fabricated with
InGaAs quantum dots, was operated in 1994.

Multiquantum-dot
active region
Figure 18.4-7 Schematic of the active
иг region of a multiquantum-dot laser, which
often consists of multiple layers, each con-

ALLY taining self-assembled multiple quantum dots

— — as shown. The typical dimensions of self-
assembled quantum dots fall in the 10-50-пт

Cladding range.

For collections of quantum dots, the delta-function density of states associated with an
isolated dot is usually smeared into a smooth profile whose character is determined by
the inhomogeneities in quantum-dot sizes and shapes. The resulting inhomogeneous
broadening of the quantum-dot laser has the distinct merit in that it offers wavelength
tunability. This contrasts with the nearly homogeneously broadened gain medium of
the quantum-well laser.

GaAs- and InP-based multiquantum-dot lasers, which serve the 1.3 and 1.55-um
wavelength regions, respectively, offer a number of performance advantages over their
quantum-well counterparts:

= Ultralow CW threshold current density at room temperature, J, = 10 A/cm? per

quantum-dot layer; this is a factor of 5 lower than its quantum-well counterpart.
= Superior gain and differential quantum efficiency.

= Reduced dependence of threshold current density on temperature; uncooled lasing

is available from a ground-state transition for temperatures as high as 200° C,
which eliminates the need for external cooling.

= Reduced sensitivity to defects facilitates the integration of Ш-У lasers with

group-IV materials such as Si and Ge.

= Reduced linewidth-enhancement factor and reduced linewidth; the linewidth—

power product of а quantum-dot DFB laser 1$ = 1 MHz-mW at an output power
of 2 mW — this is an order of magnitude lower than that of a commercial
quantum-well DFB laser operated at the same power.

= Increased operating bandwidth to 200 nm; wavelength-tunable operation is avail-

able in an external-cavity configuration (Sec. 18.3C).

= Increased modulation bandwidth for direct modulation (currently = 20 GHz at

room temperature).

18.4 QUANTUM-CONFINED LASERS 851
= Insensitivity to optical feedback for light that inadvertently reenters the cavity,
thereby avoiding the need for an isolator in an optical fiber communication sys-
tem.
= Availability of mode-locked operation with short pulse widths and high repetition
rates by virtue of broad bandwidth, fast gain dynamics, easily saturated gain and
absorption, and low linewidth-enhancement factor.
The small size and low power consumption of quantum-dot lasers, along with their
ability to operate uncooled at high temperatures, as well as the salutary features out-
lined above, make them especially suitable for use in many specialized applications.
These include sensing in hot environments as well as serving in optical clock distribu-
tion and high bit-rate optical time-division multiplexing systems (Chapter 24).
D. Quantum Cascade Lasers
Most semiconductor lasers operate via radiative electron-hole recombination. The pro-
duction of light in such interband lasers is a two-carrier, single-photon affair: a tran-
sition comprising the combination of an electron from the conduction band with a hole
in the valence band generates a single photon via stimulated emission. The quantum
cascade laser (QCL), in contrast, makes use of only a single kind of carrier, the elec-
tron, which makes multiple transitions and generates multiple photons via stimulated
emission. The QCL is therefore a unipolar rather than a bipolar device. QCLs are
constructed from a concatenated series of quantum wells, designed and biased in such
a way that a single electron injected into the conduction band of the device under-
goes a cascade of intersubband stimulated-emission transitions as it transits the device
(Fig. 18.4-8). The operating wavelength of the device is thus unrelated to the bandgaps
of the constituent semiconductor materials. Rather, the wavelength is determined by
the widths of the quantum wells and barriers, which in turn determine the subband
and miniband energy separations (Exercise 17.1-5). With hundreds to thousands of
individual layers, the QCL is, perhaps, the epitome of band-structure engineering.
| Injector Injector
nw Active Active
| region | region
> Injector Injector
nw Active TN Active
| region | region
Miniband > Miniband aN
3
Bh Hil
Hl р Miniband 2
| ПЕ | Miniband Miniband
3
| | | 2 еее q | | coo
Stage Stage
| СР Miniband 1
(a) К (b)
Figure 18.4-8 Schematic diagram of: (a) two stages of a QCL with a quantum-well active region,
and (b) two stages of a QCL with a superlattice active region. QCLs usually contain between 10 and
100 stages, comprising hundreds to thousands of individual semiconductor layers.
Quantum cascade lasers can be fabricated with either quantum-well or superlattice
active regions. As illustrated in Fig. 18.4-8(a), the quantum-well version consists of

852 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

a sequence of stages, each comprising an electron injector and a quantum-well active
region. The injector contains a collection of wells of varying widths and thin barriers
that form a superlattice, with an energy-level structure consisting of minibands sepa-
rated by minigaps (Sec. 14.1D). In the presence of bias, the electrons are injected via
resonant tunneling from the bottom (ground state) of a miniband, denoted level 3, into
the upper laser level in the quantum-well active region, denoted level 2. A photon of
frequency и = Eo,/h is emitted via stimulated emission on the 2—+1 intersubband
transition, as indicated in red in Fig. 18.4-8 (see also Sec. 17.2D). The electron then
decays via phonon scattering to level 0, whereupon it enters the miniband in the next
stage via resonant tunneling. The process is then repeated, resulting in the emission
of another photon. A typical QCL contains between 10 and 100 stages, so that a
substantial number of photons are generated for each electron that transits the device.

Because it makes use of transitions within a single band, the operation of a quantum-
well QCL bears some resemblance to the operation of an electrically pumped gas laser.
As is evident in Fig. 18.4-8(a), level 2 is not aligned with a miniband of the succeeding
stage, so that it has a relatively long lifetime (72 = 1 ps) and therefore accumulates
population. Level 1, in contrast, does not sustain population since decay to level 0 takes
place via a fast nonradiative transition and subsequent tunneling into the succeeding
stage (71 = 0.1 ps). At each stage of the QCL, therefore, the electron follows a
path similar to that for a four-level laser system in which a population inversion is
maintained on the 2—1 transition (Sec. 15.2B). As a result, the gain coefficient yo(v)
for a QCL is proportional to a narrow lineshape function g(v), as for an atomic laser
[see (16.1-1)], rather than to a broad joint density-of-states function o(v), as for an
interband semiconductor laser [see (18.2-4)]. The QCL transition linewidth arises from
lifetime broadening, intersubband scattering, and nonparabolicity of the subbands.

The superlattice QCL shown in Fig. 18.4-8(6) differs from the quantum-well version
schematized in Fig. 18.4-8(a) in that stimulated emission takes place between the
bottom and top of two minibands in the active region which, in this case, comprises
a superlattice (Sec. 17.2D). The laser frequency is thus determined by the height of
the minigap separating the two minibands. This structure is generally more suitable
for generating coherent light with wavelengths longer than about 10 jum since the
alignment between the injector and active region is less critical. Furthermore, higher
drive currents are less deleterious and a population inversion is more readily achieved
in this configuration because of very fast relaxation in the lower laser-level miniband.

Another widely used design for the QCL active region is the so-called bound-to-
continuum scheme, where the laser action involves transitions from a discrete upper
state to a superlattice miniband. This approach combines the efficient electron injection
into the upper laser level of a quantum-well QCL with the fast depopulation of the
lower laser level of a superlattice QCL, and thereby reduces the threshold and increases
the output power.

Many other QCL designs have been developed. These include superlattice devices in
which the injector region is eliminated; heterogeneous QCLs that generate broadband
radiation or supercontinuum emission by incorporating multiple cascades that operate
at different wavelengths within the active region; devices in which the light is guided
in surface-plasmon modes so that long-wavelength operation can be achieved without
thick dielectric waveguides; and Raman-laser devices that are pumped by a quantum
cascade laser integrated into the same structure. Surface-emitting and ring-cavity con-
figurations are also employed, and QCL arrays are readily fabricated.

QCLs can operate at wavelengths that stretch from the near to the far infrared,
and beyond to the THz region, all with the same heterostructure configuration. The
shortest wavelength at which a QCL can operate is determined by the heterostructure
conduction-band offset, which governs the largest available photon energy for intersub-
band transitions — large conduction-band offsets allow lasing at shorter wavelengths.
Single-mode operation can be achieved by incorporating a distributed-feedback (DFB)

18.4 QUANTUM-CONFINED LASERS 853
element into the device. External-cavity feedback, in conjunction with a rotatable grat-
ing (Sec. 18.3C), offers single-frequency operation with high spectral purity and wave-
length tuning over a range of about 10% of the center wavelength. Fine wavelength
tuning extending over a range of about 1% of the center wavelength may be achieved
by changing the injection current and/or temperature, which modify the effective re-
fractive index of the material; this in turn changes the optical pathlength of the cavity
and thus the emission wavelength. Sampled-grating DFB (SGDFB) QCLs, and arrays
thereof, extend this tunability substantially by incorporating a pair of reflection gratings
and imposing slightly different periodic spatial modulations on each. This in turn
gives rise to two sequences of periodic reflection maxima in the wavelength domain
with slightly different spacings. Single-frequency operation obtains since oscillation
can only occur when two reflection maxima align, as illustrated in Figs. 16.2-14 and
16.2-15 for multiple-mirror resonators. There are several variations on this theme.
Frequency-comb operation in the mid infrared is also readily achieved (Sec. 16.4E).
Mid-Infrared Quantum Cascade Lasers
Interest in the mid-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum was initially fos-
tered by the two regions of atmospheric transparency that lie within it: the 3—5-ит
and 8—14-~m windows, which are also known as the medium-wavelength infrared
(MWIR) and long-wavelength infrared (LWIR) bands, respectively. Quantum cascade
lasers operate over a range of wavelengths that encompasses the mid infrared (2 <
Ло < 20 ит), as well as portions of the far-infrared (20 < A, < 300 ит) and THz
(100 < A, < 1000 ит) spectral regions (see Fig. 2.0-1).

This broad range of wavelengths offers extensive opportunities for scientific, in-
dustrial, and military applications, including infrared spectroscopy, infrared imaging
and countermeasures, combustion diagnostics, rangefinding, and free-space optical
communications. Moreover, since these bands encompass the molecular-fingerprint re-
gion that contains the vibrational—rotational transition wavelengths of many molecular
species (Sec. 14.1C), the QCL has also engendered numerous remote-sensing appli-
cations, such as trace-gas analysis and sensing, chemical sensing and identification,
and isotopic analysis. Together with room-temperature mid-infrared detectors, such
as HgCdTe photovoltaic arrays and VOx microbolometer arrays (Sec. 19.5), QCLs
provide unparalleled access to the mid infrared.

As discussed above, the operating wavelength of a QCL is determined by the widths
of its quantum wells and barriers, which in turn establish the subband and miniband
energy separations. In principle, QCLs can thus be constructed using a wide variety
of semiconductor materials although the intersubband gain coefficient depends on the
well and barrier effective masses, which in turn are governed by the choice of materials.
Superior performance has been obtained by using MBE or MOCVD to fabricate the
following material systems:

= InGaAs/InAlAs quantum wells on an InP substrate

= GaAs/AlGaAs quantum wells on a GaAs substrate

= InAs/AISb quantum wells on an InAs substrate

= InGaAs/AlInAsSb, InGaAs/GaAsSb, or InGaAs/AlInGaAs on InP

= GaN/AIGaN quantum wells on a GaN substrate
As with interband lasers, strained-layer QCLs (e.g., compressively strained InGaAs
and tensilely strained InAlAs) offer improved performance. QCLs are often fabricated
in a buried-heterostructure configuration that contains between 10 and 100 stages, with
overall lengths between 1/2 and 10 mm and widths that range from 5 to 20 ит.

QCLs that operate CW at room temperature in the region 3 < A, < 25 пм (which
encompasses both the MWIR and LWIR bands) exhibit excellent performance. In
particular, devices that operate CW at room temperature in the region 3 < A, < 12 wm
deliver output powers in excess of 5 W and power-conversion efficiencies greater than

854 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

25%. Moreover, such QCLs can be modulated at high rates and can be mode-locked
to produce optical pulses of a few-picoseconds duration. Multi-wavelength QCLs can
also incorporate integrated nonlinear mixing regions to foster parametric interactions
such as difference-frequency and sum-frequency generation.

An important current frontier in QCL research is directed toward extending CW,
room-temperature operation to wavelengths both shorter and longer than the mid-
infrared, 1.е., to the near-infrared and to the THz regions, respectively. Direct ap-
proaches to achieving this would make use of heterostructures with increased band
offsets, and would mitigate the thermally activated relaxation between the upper and
lower radiative states, respectively. QCLs have been operated in the frequency range
1.2 < и < 4.9 THz, corresponding to the wavelength range 60 < A, < 250 yum, but
cryogenic cooling is required.

Comparison of QCLs with Other Mid-IR Sources

Finally, it is instructive to compare quantum cascade lasers with other commonly
encountered sources of radiation in the mid infrared. As indicated below, QCLs are
often superior because of a number of salutary features: 1) the ability to operate CW at
room temperature, 2) access to a broad range of wavelengths, 3) multiwatt CW optical
powers, 4) high power-conversion efficiencies, and 5) compact structure:

= Transition-ion-doped zinc chalcogenides such as Cr?*:ZnS and Cr?+:ZnSe

(Sec. 16.3A) offer substantial optical power and are continuously tunable, but
only over the limited wavelength range 1.9 < A, < 3.0 ит.

= CO and СО) gas lasers (Sec. 16.3E) offer output powers many orders of magni-

tude greater than those attainable with QCLs but they are bulky and fragile, and
suffer from limited ranges of accessible wavelengths.

= Difference-frequency generation (Sec. 22.2C) offers a broad range of accessible

wavelengths but it is complex and challenging to implement in a CW configura-
tion.

= Lead-salt (IV-VI) interband laser diodes, such as those fabricated from PbSnTe

and PbSnSe (Sec. 17.1B), can be compositionally tuned over a broad range of
wavelengths (4 to 30 um), which encompasses much of the mid-infrared spec-
trum. However, these devices suffer from nonradiative recombination, low ther-
mal conductivity, and small band offsets that necessitate cryogenic cooling for
CW operation. Also, optical power levels are limited to the milliwatt range and
power-conversion efficiencies are low.

= Ш-апбтопае interband laser diodes (usually InGaAsSb/AlGaAsSb quantum

wells on a GaSb substrate) offer CW, room-temperature operation with optical
powers in excess of 1.5 W and power-conversion efficiencies greater than 15%,
but only for wavelengths shorter than ~ 2.2 ит. The use of quinternary AlIn-
GaAsSb barriers allows operation to be extended to about 4 um, but growing and
using quinternary materials is a complex enterprise and output powers are limited
to tens of milliwatts in any case.

= GaSb-based interband cascade lasers (ICLs) operate CW at room temperature

and generate hundreds of milliwatts of optical power with power-conversion ef-
ficiencies of about 15%. However, ICLs operate only in the shorter wavelength
reaches of the mid-infrared spectrum, namely in the range 3 < A, < 6 им.
18.5 MICROCAVITY LASERS
The quantum confinement considered in Sec. 18.4 relates to the confinement of car-
riers to a spatial region of the order of the de Broglie wavelength of an electron (for
a thermalized electron in GaAs, Лав 50 nm). The microcavity lasers considered in

18.5 MICROCAVITYLASERS 855
this section, in contrast, involve the confinement of photons to a spatial region of the
order of the optical wavelength (Ло = Тит > Лав). Microresonators are resonators in
which one or more of the spatial dimensions is the size of a few wavelengths of light
or smaller, d = Л. Microcavities are usually thought of as having small dimensions in
all spatial directions; however, these two terms have come to be used interchangeably.
Microcavity lasers are also called microlasers.

Photon confinement and carrier confinement are independent features of photonic
devices. It is therefore possible to have a microcavity laser whose active region is
not subject to quantum confinement (e.g., a microcavity containing a simple p—n ho-
mojunction active region), or a large-resonator laser whose active region is subject
to quantum confinement (e.g., a quantum cascade laser). In practice, however, most
microcavity lasers make use of quantum-confined structures for their active regions.

Microresonator lasers in which the light is confined to wavelength-size regions in
various dimensions are exemplified by the micropillar, microdisk, and microsphere
structures illustrated in Fig. 18.5-1. These, and other, microresonators have been de-
scribed in Sec. 11.4.

Е Figure 18.5-1 Microresonator (or
» = microcavity) lasers, sometimes called
Е = 2 od 2D photonic crystal microlasers for short, confine light

4 Microdisk within wavelength-size regions in vari-

ous dimensions. The defect in the 2D

= РИ ae photonic crystal creates a cavity that
i — traps the light. Analogous quantum-
| =) = confined structures are the quantum

- . . - well, quantum wire, and quantum dot.

Micropillar Microtoroid Microsphere

In laser diodes with large resonators (d >> Л), the modes exhibit small spacings
in all directions of k-space and the density of allowed resonance frequencies M(v)
can be determined via a continuous approximation (Sec. 11.3). The overall sponta-
neous emission probability density (s~') depends on the modal density M(v) of the
frequency space into which photons can be emitted, as specified by (14.3-11). In
large-resonator lasers, as in free space, the modal density assumes the quadratic form
M(v) = 8rv?/c3, in accordance with (11.3-10). This offers a large number of modes
for spontaneous emission. After stimulated emission is initiated in a particular mode,
however, spontaneous emission into modes other than the laser mode represents wasted
energy. Indeed, for a conventional laser diode, the fraction of spontaneous emission
that contributes to a given laser mode is generally very small. The current injected
into a large-resonator laser at threshold is thus principally replenishing the wasted
spontaneous emission rather than contributing to the stimulated emission.

However, the modal density M(v) can be substantially reduced by making use of
a microcavity, as discussed in Sec. 11.4. The allowed modes of microresonators can
exhibit large spacings in one or more directions of k-space, so that modes can be absent
over extended spectral bands. The reduction is most dramatic in microcavities that
have large spacings in all directions of k-space, which results in a discrete collection
of modes (Fig. 11.4-1). The opportunity to alter the modal environment is important in
connection with spontaneous emission. Placing a source in this environment inhibits
spontaneous emission since it is directed away from modes that do not exist and toward
modes that are available. Moreover, the emission of light into particular modes of a
high-Q, small-volume microcavity can be enhanced relative to emission into ordinary
optical modes via the Purcell effect, as described in Sec. 14.3E. Microcavity lasers are
designed to take maximum advantage of opportunities for both spontaneous-emission
inhibition and enhancement.

856 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

Summary

Microcavity lasers offer a number of desirable features in comparison with their

conventional counterparts:

= Reduced size

= Reduced laser threshold
= Reduced spectral width
= Reduced spatial width
= Increased efficiency

However, reduced size generally signifies reduced output power.

We consider three classes of microcavity lasers in turn in Secs. 18.5A, 18.5B,
and 18.5C: vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs), microdisk and microring
lasers, and photonic-crystal lasers. Though microcavity lasers comprising semiconduc-
tor active media are most prevalent, gain media such as organic dyes, rare-earth-doped
silica, and organic polymers are also used.

A. Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers

Vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) are designed so that the light
emerges from the top face of a planar Fabry—Perot resonator, much like the surface-
emitting LED displayed in Fig. 18.1-18. WCSELs, which can be realized using
conventional or organic semiconductors, usually operate in the visible and near IR.
They can be fabricated with a broad range of diameters, stretching from = 1 рим, where
they resemble micropillar lasers, to = 1 шт. Small-area VCSELs have threshold
currents in the 4zA region, output powers in the mW range, and power-conversion
efficiencies in the vicinity of 70%. The output beams are circular and therefore easily
coupled to optical fibers. VCSELs find use in a broad variety of applications that range
from optical mice to short-haul optical fiber communications (Sec. 25.1В).

Large-area VCSEL. An example of a large-area VCSEL is shown in Fig. 18.5-2.
This device has a multiquantum-well GaAs/InGaAs active region with an emission

AlGaAs/GaAs Dielectric
Bragg reflectors $ Ey film pias
_ \ confinement de
GaAs/InGaAs MQW 4 — =
active region — i VY, =
AlGaAs/GaAs ЕЕ ——” = зе
Bragg CC Е
substrate
(а) (Б)
Figure 18.5-2 (a) Schematic diagram of а large-area (320-ит diameter) multiquantum-well
GaAs/InGaAs VCSEL that operates at a wavelength of 995 nm. (b) Etched mesa showing the p
contact, p-type DBR, and active region. (Adapted from M. Miller, M. Grabherr, R. King, R. Jager,
К. Michalzik, and К. J. Ebeling, Improved Output Performance of High-Power VCSELs, [EEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 7, pp. 210-216, Fig. 2 ©2001 IEEE.)

18.5 MICROCAVITY LASERS 857
wavelength centered at 995 nm. Because the thickness of the active region is only tens
of nm, the single-pass gain is typically small (a fraction of 1%) and the light must
be repeatedly reflected through the active region. Typical distributed Bragg reflector
(DBR) mirrors contain dozens of layers to enhance reflectance at the operating wave-
length. VCSELs often make use of dielectric films to localize carrier injection and
thereby to laterally confine the optical mode. The spectral intensity, optical power, and
angular emission distribution generated by the laser portrayed in Fig. 18.5-2 are shown
in Fig. 18.5-3.
>10 = 10 10
Zos wos Zos
з 5 Ра
= Е 8
806 8 06 Я 056
5 3 2
3 04 Е 04 Е 04
202 8 02 Я 02
= Е

0 во = 0

991 993 995 997 999 0 0.5 10 15 20 25 30 35 -20 -10 0 10 20

Wavelength Л, (nm) Drive current i (A) Far-field angle (deg)
Figure 18.5-3 Spectral intensity, optical power, and angular emission distribution of the
multiquantum-well GaAs/InGaAs VCSEL displayed in Fig. 18.5-2. The threshold current i, = 1.1 А
for this large-area device. The maximum optical power, about 1 W, is similar to that provided by the
edge-emitting buried-heterostructure DFB laser depicted in Fig. 18.4-5. (Adapted from М. Miller,
M. Grabherr, R. King, R. Jager, R. Michalzik, and K. J. Ebeling, Improved Output Performance of
High-Power VCSELs, /EEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 7, рр. 210-216,
Figs. 8, 5, and 9 ©2001 IEEE.)

Multiquantum-dot VCSEL. Though the active regions of VCSELs are usually
multiquantum wells, they are also fabricated with multiquantum dots, as illustrated
in Fig. 18.5-4. As with other structures that make use of quantum-dot emitters, the
promise of reduced threshold and reduced temperature sensitivity, together with en-
hanced modulation bandwidth, is appealing.

|
АЕ AlGaAs
~~, Cladding layers
GaAs/AIO Е 2
Bragg reflectors | A= RK

7 и
р” У Divlectric Figure 18.5-4 VCSEL with a
Se ils multiquantum-dot active region.
= 4

substrate
GaAs

Variations on the VCSEL theme. VCSELs assume an enormous variety of
forms, and can incorporate auxiliary features such as photonic crystals for lateral
mode control, coupled cavities, and integrated modulators that extend modulation
bandwidths, as portrayed in Fig. 18.5-5.

858 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
1 AlGaAs баз {
Photonic ЕТ \ axtiveregion f +E
crystal in DBR < SS Modulator Se GaAs / InGaAs
y= ==\y | <——<—>2 “9,
AlGaAs / GaAs SHH
Bragg reflectors = Г. | a -y
\ | fe xX 7 VCSEL ==)
GaAs iW | ae Dielectric
substrate Dielectric film
film — GaAs
AlAs _ AlAs substrate
confinement layers + confinement layers
(а) (Б)
Figure 18.5-5 Variations on the theme of VCSELs. (а) VCSEL with photonic crystal for lateral
mode control. (6) VCSEL with monolithically integrated electroabsorption modulator.
VCSEL Arrays
A salutary feature of VCSELs is that they offer high packing densities on a wafer
scale and are readily fabricated in the form of dense arrays. As an early example, an
array of about | million electrically pumped, tiny, vertical-cavity cylindrical InGaAs
quantum-well VCSELs (diameter = 2 ит, height = 5.5 zm), with lasing wavelengths
in the vicinity of 970 nm, was fabricated on a single 1-cm? chip of GaAs. These
particular devices had thresholds i, 100 wA, and operated CW at room temperature.
A scanning electron micrograph of a tiny portion of this array is displayed in Fig. 18.5-
6. VCSEL arrays can be fabricated with elements that have a prespecified distribution
of diameters and laser frequencies.
: Figure 18.5-6 Scanning electron micrographs of
о — 56 эх an early array of electrically pumped vertical-cavity
F 2 25 surface-emitting Ino. 2Gag.gAs quantum-well lasers with
: — %- $ 4 & 55 я. diameters between 1 and 5 ит on a GaAs chip. The
=; = | - microresonators comprise AlAs/GaAs Bragg reflectors.
—= = = г (a) AlAs has been preferentially etched away from
| в iF : AY ь Фе Bragg reflectors in these devices, highlighting the
‚== 3 — 7 г. GaAs disks (courtesy J. L. Jewell). (6) Тор view of a
= == == | a 99 д small portion of the array. (Adapted from J. L. Jewell,
= = 3 : a > A. Scherer, S. L. McCall, Y. H. Lee, $. Walker, J. P. Har-
= —— : “9 - bison, and L. Т. Florez, Low-Threshold Electrically
_ a sae Pumped Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Microlasers,
(а) (6) Optics News, vol. 15, по. 12, pp. 10-11, 1989, Fig. 1.)
Two-dimensional arrays of incoherent emitters, as described above, offer broad-
area power scaling. However, coherently combining the light emitted by a collection
of individual VCSELs can, by virtue of the interferences among the individual emis-
sions, achieve a divergence below that of a single emitter as well as increased on-
axis intensity. Features such as these are important for applications such as imaging,
targeting, sensing, and optical communications. Techniques for achieving coherent
beam combination include injection locking and lateral coupling among neighboring
incoherent emitters. In injection locking, part of the output from a single master laser,
which may be separate from the array or one of the devices within it, is distributed
and reflected back to seed all of the slave lasers, thereby causing them to oscillate
coherently. Lateral coupling can be implemented via diffractive or antiguided (leaky-
mode) interactions; evanescent interactions have proved difficult to marshal. Typical
coherent power levels from arrays of hundreds of VCSELs are in the range of hundreds
of mW.

18.5 MICROCAVITYLASERS 859
Vertical External-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers (VECSELs)
As with external-cavity laser diodes (Sec. 18.3C), the VCSEL structure can be en-
dowed with an external cavity to form a wavelength-tunable, single-mode vertical
external-cavity surface-emitting laser (VECSEL), sometimes called a semiconduc-
tor disk laser (SDL). In one configuration, used in optical coherence tomography,
tuning is provided by a movable microelectromechanical system (MEMS) that serves
as the upper mirror. As with diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers (Sec. 16.4D), the
use of an intracavity semiconductor saturable-absorber mirror (SESAM) can provide
passive mode locking; VECSELs can attain pulse durations T,..,. < 100 fs and pulse
repetition rates 1/7 = 50 GHz. Much аз with VCSELs, VECSELs (along with QCLs
and РЕВ lasers) can be fabricated in the form of arrays.
B. Microdisk and Microring Lasers
The march toward device miniaturization has facilitated the integration of lasers and
other optical components in compact configurations and photonic integrated circuits
(PICs). Microdisk lasers are configured with active regions comprising organic or
conventional semiconductors, and most rely on quantum-well or quantum-dot struc-
tures. Ш-У and II-nitride devices operate over broad spectral ranges, stretching from
the infrared to the ultraviolet. Because of their small size, low power consumption,
low threshold current, ease of out-coupling, and CW room-temperature operation,
dielectric microdisk lasers have experienced robust development since their invention
in the early 1990s. They are often grown on their native substrates, but they can also
be epitaxially grown on silicon — in some cases with equivalent performance. Electric
current and mechanical support are provided by n- and p-type structures below and
above the disk. Whereas VCSELs operate on the basis of Fabry—Perot modes and emit
light vertically, microdisk lasers rely on high-@ whispering-gallery modes (Sec. 11.4B)
and emit in the plane of the semiconductor substrate; light is extracted via in-plane
coupling waveguides.

The modal structure of microring lasers, sometimes called microtoroid lasers, is
quite similar to that of microdisk lasers of the same radius; indeed, a microring device
can be considered to be a limiting case of a microdisk device in which the inner wall
simply limits the number of modes in the radial direction. The overall dimensions of
these devices typically lie in the multi-zm range, larger than the wavelength of the
emitted light since they confine light by means of whispering-gallery modes. Applica-
tions of microdisk and microring lasers range from short-reach interconnects such as
on-chip data communications to the detection of viruses and nanoparticles.

Silicon Photonics and Сгоир-У Devices

In the domains of silicon photonics and group-IV photonics, respectively, microcavity
lasers can be fabricated via the direct heteroepitaxial growth of Ш-У quantum dots on
Si and by the growth of GeSn on Si.

ПЕУ quantum-dot-on-Si microring laser. Microring lasers containing active
regions that consist of seven InAs/InGaAs quantum-dot-in-well (DWELL) layers have
been epitaxially grown on planar or V-groove-patterned Si substrates.’ The ring outer
radii stretch from 5 to 50 ит and the ring widths range from 2 to 7 ит. These
electrically pumped devices operate CW at room temperature. A microring device
with а 5-ит outer radius and а 3-jm ring width exhibits a laser threshold of 0.6 mA
and emits 8 wW near A, = 1.3 им at a drive current of 2 mA. In comparison with

1 See У. Wan, J. Norman, О. Li, М. J. Kennedy, О. Liang, С. Zhang, О. Huang, Z. Zhang, А. У. Liu, A. Torres,
D. Jung, A. С. Gossard, Е. L. Hu, К. М. Lau, and J. Е. Bowers, 1.3 zm Submilliamp Threshold Quantum Dot
Micro-Lasers on Si, Optica, vol. 4, pp. 940-944, 2017.

860 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

quantum-well devices, quantum-dot lasers offer substantially lower thresholds and
reduced sensitivity to temperature, as well as other salutary features, as discussed in
Sec. 18.4С.

GeSn-on-Si microdisk laser. Direct-bandgap lasers can be fabricated by grow-
ing an alloy of Ge and a-Sn on a Ge-buffered Si substrate. An alloy of composi-
tion Geg.915SNg.og5 contains just enough Sn to equalize the energies of the direct-
bandgap (Г) valley and the energetically lowest indirect-bandgap (L) valley in the
band structure of Ge, thereby creating a direct-bandgap group-IV material. An 8-ит-
diameter Geo.g75Sno,125 microdisk laser, pumped with a pulsed Nd: YAG laser operated
at Ло = 1.064 ит, lases at Ло = 2.5 yum." In the current state of its development, this
optically pumped, pulsed microdisk laser requires cooling but double-heterostructure
Si,Ge)_z—ySn,/Ge;_,Sn, devices, as well as multiquantum-well structures, promise
electrically pumped, CW operation at room temperature.

Optical Vortex-Beam Lasers

Light beams carrying orbital angular momentum (OAM) possess helical wavefronts
which, by virtue of this additional degree of freedom, are appealing for use in spe-
cialized applications. An example of such an optical vortex is the Laguerre—Gaussian
beam (Sec. 3.4); beams with spiral wavefronts can be produced with the help of holo-
graphic optical elements (Example 4.5-3). An optical vortex beam can also be gen-
erated by injecting light into a whispering-gallery mode microcavity fitted with an
embedded refractive-index grating structure in the azimuthal direction. Recently, a
microcavity laser that directly generates a single-mode OAM vortex beam, with a
topological charge that can be chosen at will, has been developed.* Unidirectional
lasing in a microring resonator that supports whispering-gallery modes with large
values of OAM is induced by selectively modulating the refractive index and gain/loss,
which breaks the rotational symmetry of the lasing process. The microring sidewalls
are designed in such a way that scattering causes the vortex beam to emerge vertically
from the plane of the device, mimicking the output of a VCSEL.

C. Photonic-Crystal Lasers

Microcavities consisting of defects in photonic crystals (Sec. 11.4D), together with
miniature quantum-confined emission sources such as quantum wells or quantum dots,
can serve as wavelength-size lasers and laser arrays. Photonic-crystal lasers, with ac-
tive volumes smaller than those of VCSELs and microdisk lasers, offer ultralow thresh-
olds, ultralow power consumption, and high direct-modulation rates. They are suitable
for sending information over distances of centimeters or millimeters, and promise
substantially reduced power consumption in venues such as datacenters, where on-chip
and rack-to-rack communications has long been mediated electrically (Sec. 24.1D).
2D Photonic-Crystal Lasers

Examples of individual 2D photonic-crystal devices, as well as coherently coupled
arrays of such devices, are illustrated in Figs. 18.5-7(a) and (5), respectively. The
device displayed in Fig. 18.5-7(а) is a single-mode 2D photonic-bandgap laser that
operates at room temperature. It is electrically pumped via a sub-micron-size post and

1 See D. Stange, 5. Wirths, В. Geiger, С. Schulte-Braucks, В. Marzban, М. von den Driesch, G. Mussler,
T. Zabel, T. Stoica, J.-M. Hartmann, $. Мапи, Z. Ikonic, О. Griitzmacher, Н. Sigg, J. Witzens, and О. Buca,
Optically Pumped GeSn Microdisk Lasers on Si, ACS Photonics, vol. 3, pp. 1279-1285, 2016.

* See Р, Miao, Z. Zhang, J. Sun, W. Walasik, S. Longhi, L. M. Lichinitser, and L. Feng, Orbital Angular
Momentum Microlaser, Science, vol. 353, pp. 464-467, 2016.

18.5 MICROCAVITY LASERS 861
has a threshold current of 260 A.” The active region comprises six strained InGaAsP
quantum wells and lasing occurs at Ло = 1520 nm. The structure produces 2 nW of
power at a current of 1/2 mA and has a differential responsivity R ~ 10-5. The quality
factor and modal volume are О = 2500 and У = 0.06 рип, respectively. Since the
emission linewidth Av is smaller than the width of an electromagnetic mode in the
device ди, and the quality factor ©) of the microcavity is high, spontaneous emission
is enhanced via the Purcell effect (Sec. 14.3E and Fig. 14.3-12). The Purcell factor for
this device is Fp = (3/47?)(A°/V)Q = 400.

; | foe
confinement НЕНЕЕ AALS | confinement <= See ЕЕ
layers — layers =
InGaAs
InGaAsP/InGaAsP => ‘ayers ВА cs
activeregion InP InP р. ; МОм. ШР © _ Dielectri layers
post substrate + Dielectric active region substrate + ielectric
(a) (Б)
Figure 18.5-7 (а) InGaAsP/InGaAsP 2D multiquantum-well photonic-crystal laser. The InP post
has a height of 1 дит and serves as an electrical contact. (b) Array of coherently coupled 2D quantum-
well photonic-crystal lasers.

The nW-level output power of an individual device may be substantially en-
hanced by constructing a coherently coupled microcavity-array laser, as portrayed
in Fig. 18.5-7(6). This particular array comprises 81 cavities and four InGaAsP/InP
quantum wells, with an overall array area ~ 15 pum? and output power = 12 wW. A
distributed-feedback version of a 2D photonic-crystal laser, in which feedback takes
place over the entire 2D plane, achieves what is known as band-edge lasing. 2D
photonic-crystal lasers rely on conventional reflection for out-of-plane confinement.
3D Photonic-Crystal Lasers
Lasing may also be attained in a 3D photonic-crystal microcavity with a complete
photonic bandgap (Sec. 7.3B). Such devices, which operate at room temperature and
often make use of active regions comprising electrically pumped stacks of quantum-
dot layers, can attain values of Q = 40000 and modulation rates of 10 Gb/s. Both
electrons and photons are confined in three dimensions in such devices."
ПИ
EXAMPLE 18.5-1. Thresholdless Quantum-Dot Photonic-Crystal Laser. In a cavity
of wavelength size with dimensions such that only one optical mode is permitted to exist, photon
emission must be into that unique mode, whether the emission is via spontaneous or stimulated emis-
sion. Since there is then no distinction between the two processes, the kink in the light—-current (L-i)
curve that characterizes the transition from spontaneous to stimulated emission in a conventional
laser, and thus determines the “laser threshold,” disappears (1.е., occurs at zero current). Constructing
a thresholdless laser thus involves imposing strict control on the modal structure of the resonator.
The fraction of spontaneous emission that contributes to a given laser mode is specified by the

* See H.-G. Park, S.-H. Kim, S.-H. Kwon, Y.-G. Ju, J.-K. Yang, J.-H. Baek, S.-B. Kim, and Y.-H. Lee,
Electrically Driven Single-Cell Photonic Crystal Laser, Science, vol. 305, pp. 1444—1447, 2004.

1 See, e.g., К. Takeda, Т. Sato, A. Shinya, К. Nozaki, W. Kobayashi, H. Taniyama, М. Notomi, К. Hasebe,
T. Kakitsuka, and S. Matsuo, Few-fJ/Bit Data Transmissions Using Directly Modulated Lambda-Scale Embedded
Active Region Photonic-Crystal Lasers, Nature Photonics, vol. 7, pp. 569-575, 2013.

862 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

spontaneous-emission coupling coefficient В. This parameter is typically minuscule for conventional
laser diodes; for an edge-emitting device it turns out to be В == 10-5. As indicated earlier, microcavity
lasers are designed to optimize the inhibition and enhancement of spontaneous emission. Indeed, the
modification of the modal density provided by microcavities (and nanocavities) can increase B by
many orders of magnitude. Implementing such a modification has the concomitant benefit of reducing
the laser-diode threshold current 7, by a commensurate amount.

An optically pumped laser is characterized by a light-light (L-L) curve analogous to the light—
current (L-1) curve of an electrically injected laser diode. A nearly thresholdless optically pumped
laser (В = 0.85), with a threshold intensity [, < 1 и\, has been fabricated by embedding InAsSb
quantum dots in a photonic-crystal microcavity. The device is pumped by a CW laser diode at 785
nm. It emits light at Ло = 1.3 jm and operates at room temperature.”
ПИ

18.6 NANOCAVITY LASERS

The lasers considered in Secs. 18.4 and 18.5 rely on refractive-index differences be-
tween dielectrics to confine light in their resonators. The physical and modal sizes
of such lasers in any given direction are therefore greater than the wavelength of
the emitted light. In this section, we consider lasers that rely on metal-based non-
plasmonic and plasmonic resonators that confine light to subwavelength dimensions
while operating at optical frequencies. The active media in such nanocavity lasers, or
nanolasers, are often semiconductors in the form of bulk, quantum-well, or quantum-
dot structures, but organic semiconductors and dye solutions are used as well. As
a consequence of dissipation, lasers with metal-based resonators have substantially
reduced values of the quality factor Q that must be overcome by increased gain. Both
bottom-up and top-down approaches are used in fabrication.

Both non-plasmonic and plasmonic nanolasers have been developed. Non-plasmonic
devices, consisting of subwavelength-size metal cavities that encapsulate high-gain
materials, support non-evanescent electromagnetic modes. The metal cladding limits
the transverse size of the device, which enhances modal confinement and diminishes
the volume of the active region. These devices can be electrically pumped, operated at
room temperature, and operated at timescales that stretch from femtoseconds to CW.

Plasmonic nanolasers can be constructed with overall physical and modal sizes
of the order of tens to hundreds of nanometers — well below the micrometer sizes
associated with microcavity lasers. Plasmonic devices operate on the basis of propagat-
ing surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) or nonpropagating localized surface plasmons
(LSPs). Both versions make use of metal—dielectric or metal-semiconductor interfaces
to confine light to subwavelength dimensions. Surface plasmon polariton nanolasers
use resonators such as metal—dielectric nanodisks (Sec. 11.4E), or plasmonic wave-
guides such as metal—insulator—metal (MIM), metal—insulator-semiconductor (MIS),
or metal-slab structures (Sec. 9.6). Gain is provided by replacing the dielectric in-
sulating material in these resonators with an active gain medium, such as a direct-
bandgap semiconductor or a dye. Feedback is provided in the same manner as for
conventional lasers, namely via a Fabry—Perot cavity, a DFB grating, or a circular
disk or ring structure that supports whispering-gallery modes. Propagating SPPs do
not rely on resonances, so this class of devices offers broadband operation. Localized
surface plasmon nanolasers, on the other hand, make use of plasmonic resonators such
as the metallic nanosphere (Fig. 8.2-6 and Sec. 11.4E). The gain is then provided by
replacing the surrounding dielectric material with an active gain medium such as a
dye-impregnated shell.

1 See I. Prieto, J. М. Llorens, L. Е. Mufioz-Camiiiez, А. С. Taboada, J. Canet-Ferrer, J. М. Ripalda, С. Robles,
G. Mujfioz-Matutano, J. Р. Martinez-Pastor, and P. A. Postigo, Near Thresholdless Laser Operation at Room
Temperature, Optica, vol. 2, pp. 66-69, 2015.

18.6 NANOCAVITY LASERS 863

Diminishing the size of a laser to the nanoscale has manifold benefits for certain
applications. These include:

= Reduced laser threshold

= Increased differential power-conversion efficiency (slope efficiency)

= Increased modulation bandwidth
Nanometer-size devices can be used in chip-scale optical communications and data-
processing, display technology, and near-field photolithography. They can also be de-
ployed in wireless sensor networks. Moreover, nanolasers can be implanted or injected
into biological materials to carry out tasks such as imaging, sensing, spectroscopy, and
therapeutics.

Representative examples of these three types of nanolasers are set forth below: 1) a
metal-nanocavity laser; 2) a SPP nanoring laser; and 3) a LSP nanosphere laser.
Non-Plasmonic Nanocavity Lasers
Non-plasmonic nanolasers make use of subwavelength-size external metal cavities that
support non-evanescent electromagnetic modes and encapsulate gain media such as
semiconductors.

Ag-clad InGaAs metal-nanocavity laser. We consider a subwavelength metal-
cavity nanolaser that takes the form of a rectangular pillar of InP/InGaAs/InP, with a
SiN insulating layer, encapsulated in a rectangular silver shell that serves as a metal-
lic Fabry—Perot resonator.’ The light is mostly confined within the rectangular bulk-
InGaAs active region (refractive index n = 3.4), which is sandwiched between two
rectangular InP confining regions of lower refractive index (п = 3.1). The device
operates CW at room temperature and is electrically pumped (threshold current 74 =
1.1 mA). It lases at A, = 1.59 um with a linewidth of 0.5 nm. The cavity volume is
0.67 ЛЗ and the quality factor corresponding to the observed linewidth is О = 3182.
Configured in a flip-chip configuration, the emitted light passes through the substrate
and emerges vertically. Despite the presence of the lossy metal comprising the cavity,
the properties and performance of this semiconductor nanocavity laser are comparable
to those of a conventional semiconductor microcavity laser, thereby demonstrating that
metallic dissipation can be vanquished by semiconductor gain. Replacing the bulk-
semiconductor active region with quantum wells or quantum dots should improve
performance, as should improved heat dissipation.

Plasmonic Nanocavity Lasers

Plasmonic nanolasers incorporate metals within subwavelength-size internal structures
that support evanescent modes and are juxtaposed with gain media such as semi-
conductors or dyes. Plasmonic devices function either via surface plasmon polariton
(SPP) traveling waves (Sec. 8.2B) or via localized surface plasmon (LSP) oscillations
(Sec. 8.2C) at their metal—dielectric boundaries. We first consider an example of an SPP
plasmonic nanolaser and follow this with an example of an LSP plasmonic nanolaser
(spaser).

MIS-on-Si surface-plasmon-polariton nanoring laser. Subwavelength nanocav-
ity lasers based on the amplification of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) have
been developed in a number of configurations. One didactic version makes use of
a Ag-Al,03-AlInGaP metal—insulator-semiconductor (MIS) structure that supports

See К. Ding, M. T. Hill, Z. C. Liu, L. J. Yin, P. J. van Veldhoven, and C. Z. Ning, Record Performance
of Electrical Injection Sub-Wavelength Metallic-Cavity Semiconductor Lasers at Room Temperature, Optics
Express, vol. 21, pp. 4728-4733, 2013.

864 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

surface plasmon polariton whispering-gallery modes in a nanoring cavity.* The

lithographically defined ring has inner and outer diameters of 0.79 and 1.09 um,

respectively, so that the ring width is 150 nm. The nanolaser sits on a Si substrate
and operates at room temperature. The AlInGaP heterostructure gain medium has an
overall thickness of 110 nm and provides broadband gain at room temperature. The
570-nm pump laser supplies 4-ps pulses at a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The onset of

lasing from a pair of 2D whispering gallery modes, at 610 and 634 nm, occurs at a

threshold pump energy density of = 2 mJ/cm? per pulse. Similar devices have been

fabricated with other cavity geometries, including waveguides, 3D disks and squares,
and arrays.

Dye-clad-Au nanosphere localized-surface-plasmon spaser. A subwavelength
nanocavity laser based on the amplification of localized surface plasmons (LSPs)
is often referred to as a spaser, an acronym for Surface Plasmon Amplification by
Stimulated Emission of Radiation, a term coined by Bergman and Stockman in 2003.
In analogy with a laser, a spaser generates stimulated emission of localized surface
plasmons in resonant metallic nanostructures juxtaposed with a gain medium. The
first spaser-based nanolaser, which dates to 2009, consisted of a collection of 15-nm-
diameter gold-nanosphere resonators surrounded by silica shells doped with green
dye to provide gain and compensate for metallic dissipative losses. Pump pulses were
provided by an optical parametric oscillator operated at 488 nm. A collection of these
44-nm-diameter core-shell nanoparticles supported surface plasmon oscillations that
out-coupled to photonic modes at a wavelength of 531 nm.’ Subsequently, a spaser
with tunable output wavelength was implemented by replacing the Au nanospheres
with Au nanorods and by making use of different organic dyes at various doping levels
as gain media.

READING LIST

LEDs and OLEDs

See also the reading list in Chapter 17.

T.-Y. Seong, J. Han, H. Amano, and H. Morkog, eds., П/-Мипае Based Light Emitting Diodes and
Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2017.

D. J. Gaspar and E. Polikarpov, eds., OLED Fundamentals: Materials, Devices, and Processing of
Organic Light-Emitting Diodes, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2015.

M. H. Crawford, J. J. Wierer, A. J. Fischer, G. T. Wang, D. D. Koleske, G. S. Subramania,
M. E. Coltrin, J. Y. Tsao, and R. F. Karlicek, Jr., Solid-State Lighting: Toward Smart and
Ultra-Efficient Materials, Devices, Lamps and Systems, in D. L. Andrews, ed., Photonics:
Scientific Foundations, Technology and Applications, Volume Ш, Photonics Technology and
Instrumentation, Wiley-Science Wise, 2015.

V. K. Khanna, Fundamentals of Solid-State Lighting: LEDs, OLEDs, and Their Applications in
Illumination and Displays, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2014.

J.-J. Huang, H.-C. Kuo, and S.-C. Shen, eds., Nitride Semiconductor Light-Emitting Diodes (LEDs):
Materials, Technologies and Applications, Woodhead, 2014.

A. Buckley, ed., Organic Light-Emitting Diodes (OLEDs): Materials, Devices and Applications,
Woodhead, 2013.

$. Nakamura and М. В. Krames, History of Gallium-Nitride-Based Light-Emitting Diodes for Ilu-
mination, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 101, рр. 2211-2220, 2013.

Е. Е. Schubert, Light-Emitting Diodes, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2006.

* See М. Liu, A. Gocalinska, J. Justice, Е. Gity, I. Povey, В. McCarthy, М. Pemble, Е. Pelucchi, H. Wei,
C. Silien, H. Xu, and B. Corbett, Lithographically Defined, Room Temperature Low Threshold Subwavelength
Red-Emitting Hybrid Plasmonic Lasers, Nano Letters, vol. 16, рр. 7822—7828, 2016.

1 See М. А. Noginov, G. Zhu, A. М. Belgrave, В. Bakker, У. М. Shalaev, Е. Е, Narimanov, S. Stout, Е. Herz,
T. Suteewong, and U. Wiesner, Demonstration of a Spaser-Based Nanolaser, Nature, vol. 460, pp. 1110-1113,
2009.

READING LIST 865

J. Н. Burroughes, О. О. С. Bradley, A. R. Brown, В. М. Marks, К. Mackay, В. H. Friend, P. L. Burn,
and A. B. Holmes, Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Conjugated Polymers, Nature, vol. 347,
pp. 539-541, 1990.

С. W. Tang and $. A. VanSlyke, Organic Electroluminescent Diodes, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 51,
pp. 913-915, 1987.

H. J. Round, A Note on Carborundum, Electrical World, vol. 49, p. 309, 1907.

Silicon Photonics

See also the reading list on photonic integrated circuits in Chapter 25.

D. Van Thourhout, Z. Wang, and С. Roelkens, III—V-on-Silicon Integration, Optics & Photonics
News, vol. 28, по. 3, рр. 32—39, 2017.

D. Thomson, А. Zilkie, J. Е. Bowers, Т. Komljenovic, G. T. Reed, L. Vivien, О. Marris-Morini,
Е. Cassan, L. Virot, J.-M. Fédéli, J.-M. Hartmann, J. H. Schmid, D.-X. Хи, Е. Boeuf, P. O’Brien,
G. Z. Mashanovich, and M. Nedeljkovic, Roadmap on Silicon Photonics, Journal of Optics, vol.
18, 073003, 2016.

J. W. Silverstone, D. Bonneau, J. L. O’Brien, and M. G. Thompson, Silicon Quantum Photonics,
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 22, 6700113, 2016.

L. Chrostowski and M. Hochberg, Silicon Photonics Design: From Devices to Systems, Cambridge
University Press, 2015.

A. Y. Liu, S. Srinivasan, J. Norman, A. C. Gossard, and J. E. Bowers, Quantum Dot Lasers for Silicon
Photonics, Photonics Research, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. В1-В9, 2015.

Z. Zhou, B. Yin, and J. Michel, On-Chip Light Sources for Silicon Photonics, Light: Science &
Applications (2015) 4, e358; doi:10.1038/Isa.2015.131

W. Bogaerts, Silicon Photonics, in D. L. Andrews, ed., Photonics: Scientific Foundations, Technology
and Applications, Volume П, Nanophotonic Structures and Materials, Wiley—Science Wise, 2015.

В. К. Koch, $. Srinivasan, and J. Е. Bowers, Hybrid Silicon Lasers, in I. Р. Kaminow, Т. Li, and
A. E. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Aca-
demic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

L. Vivien and L. Pavesi, eds., Handbook of Silicon Photonics, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2013.

M. J. Deen and P. K. Basu, Silicon Photonics: Fundamentals and Devices, Wiley, 2012.

D. J. Lockwood and Г. Pavesi, eds., Silicon Photonics II: Components and Integration, Springer-
Verlag, 2011.

H. Rong, S. Xu, Y.-H. Kuo, V. Sih, O. Cohen, O. Raday, and M. Paniccia, Low-Threshold Continuous-
Wave Raman Silicon Laser, Nature Photonics, vol. 1, рр. 232—237, 2007.

H. Rong, R. Jones, A. Liu, O. Cohen, D. Hak, A. Fang, and M. Paniccia, A Continuous-Wave Raman
Silicon Laser, Nature, vol. 433, pp. 725—728, 2005.

Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers and Laser Diodes

See also the reading lists in Chapters 15—17.

J. Ohtsubo, Semiconductor Lasers: Stability, Instability and Chaos, Springer-Verlag, 4th ed. 2017.

P. K. Basu, B. Mukhopadhyay, and R. Basu, Semiconductor Laser Theory, CRC Press/Taylor &
Francis, 2016.

T. Numai, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Lasers, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2015.

N. K. Dutta and Q. Wang, Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2013.

Г. A. Coldren, 5. W. Corzine, and М. L. MaSanovi¢, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits,
Wiley, 2nd ed. 2012.

S. Nakamura, S. Pearton, and G. Fasol, The Blue Laser Diode: The Complete Story, Springer-Verlag,
2nd ed. 2000.

J. J. Coleman, ed., Selected Papers on Semiconductor Diode Lasers, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 50), 1992.

H. Amano, T. Asahi, and I. Akasaki, Stimulated Emission Near Ultraviolet at Room Temperature
from a GaN Film Grown on Sapphire by MOVPE Using an AIN Buffer Layer, Japanese Journal
of Applied Physics, vol. 29, pp. L205—L206, 1990.

Zh. I. Alferov, V. M. Andreev, E. L. Portnoi, and M. K. Trukan, AlAs-GaAs Heterojunction Injec-
tion Lasers with a Low Room-Temperature Threshold, Soviet Physics—Semiconductors, vol. 3,
рр. 1107—1110, 1970 [Fizika i Tekhnika Poluprovodnikov, vol. 3, pp. 1328-1332, 1969].

866 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

Quantum-Confined and Microcavity Lasers

See also the reading list on quantum-confined materials and nanostructures in Chapter 17.

A. Rahimi-Iman, Recent Advances in VECSELs, Journal of Optics, vol. 18, 093003, 2016.

P. Blood, Quantum Confined Laser Devices: Optical Gain and Recombination in Semiconductors,
Oxford University Press, 2015.

J. Wu, S. Chen, A. Seeds, and H. Liu, Quantum Dot Optoelectronic Devices: Lasers, Photodetectors
and Solar Cells, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, vol. 48, 363001, 2015.

У. Zhang, X. Zhang, К. H. Li, У. Е Cheung, С. Feng, and H. W. Choi, Advances in Ш-Миаае
Semiconductor Microdisk Lasers, Physica Status Solidi A, vol. 212, pp. 960-973, 2015.

R. De La Rue, S. Yu, and J.-M. Lourtioz, eds., Compact Semiconductor Lasers, Wiley-VCH, 2014.

M. T. Hill and M. C. Gather, Advances in Small Lasers, Nature Photonics, vol. 8, pp. 908-918, 2014.

R. Michalzik, ed., VCSELs: Fundamentals, Technology and Applications of Vertical-Cavity Surface-
Emitting Lasers, Springer-Verlag, 2013.

K. Takeda, T. Sato, A. Shinya, K. Nozaki, W. Kobayashi, H. Taniyama, M. Notomi, K. Hasebe,
T. Kakitsuka, and $. Matsuo, Few-fJ/Bit Data Transmissions Using Directly Modulated Lambda-
Scale Embedded Active Region Photonic-Crystal Lasers, Nature Photonics, vol. 7, рр. 569—575,
2013.

C. Jagadish and E. R. Weber, eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, J. J. Coleman, A. C. Bryce, and
C. Jagadish, eds., Volume 86, Advances in Semiconductor Lasers, Academic Press/Elsevier, 2012.

Х. Cai, J. Wang, М. J. Strain, В. Johnson-Morris, J. Zhu, М. Sorel, J. L. O’Brien, M. G. Thompson,
and S. Yu, Integrated Compact Optical Vortex Beam Emitters, Science, vol. 338, pp. 363-366,
2012.

О. G. Okhotnikov, ed., Semiconductor Disk Lasers: Physics and Technology, Wiley-VCH, 2010.

O. Painter, R. K. Lee, A. Scherer, A. Yariv, J. D. O’ Brien, P. D. Dapkus, and I. Kim, Two-Dimensional
Photonic Band-Gap Defect Mode Laser, Science, vol. 284, pp. 1819-1821, 1999.

М. Kirstaedter, М. М. Ledentsov, М. Grundmann, О. Bimberg, У. М. Ustinov, $. S. Ruvimov,
М. У. Maximov, Р. 5. Kop’ev, Zh. Г. Alferov, U. Richter, P. Werner, U. Обз@е, and J. Heydenreich,
Low Threshold, Large To Injection Laser Emission from (InGa)As Quantum Dots, Electronics
Letters, vol. 30, рр. 1416-1417, 1994.

Р. 5. Zory, Л., ed., Quantum Well Lasers, Academic Press, 1993.

А. Е. J. Levi, В. Е. Slusher, 5. L. McCall, T, Tanbun-Ek, О. L. Coblentz, and S. J. Pearton, Room
Temperature Operation of Microdisc Lasers with Submilliamp Threshold Current. Electronics
Letters, vol. 28, pp. 1010-1012, 1992.

J. Г. Jewell, A. Scherer, S. L. McCall, Y. H. Lee, S. Walker, J. Р. Harbison, and L. T. Florez, Low-
Threshold Electrically Pumped Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Microlasers, Electronics Letters,
vol. 25, pp. 1123-1124, 1989.

В. О. Dupuis, Р. О. Dapkus, В. Chin, М. Holonyak, Jr., and $. W. Kirchoefer, Continuous 300° К
Laser Operation of Single- Quantum-Well Al,,Ga;_,,As—GaAs Heterostructure Diodes Grown by
Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 34, pp. 265—267, 1979.

Mid-Infrared Interband and Quantum Cascade Lasers

W. Zhou, N. Bandyopadhyay, D. Wu, R. McClintock, and M. Razeghi, Monolithically, Widely Tun-
able Quantum Cascade Lasers Based on a Heterogeneous Active Region Design, Scientific Re-
ports, vol. 6, 25213, 2016.

M. S. Vitiello, G. Scalari, B. Williams, and P. De Natale, Quantum Cascade Lasers: 20 Years of
Challenges, Optics Express, vol. 23, рр. 5167-5182, 2015.

J. Faist, Quantum Cascade Lasers, Oxford University Press, 2013.

М. Troccoli, A. Lyakh, J. Fan, X. Wang, В. Maulini, A. G. Tsekoun, В. Go, and С. К. М. Patel, Long-
Wave IR Quantum Cascade Lasers for Emission in the Л = 8-12 ит Spectral Region, Optical
Materials Express, vol. 3, 1546-1560, 2013.

Y. Yao, A. J. Hoffman, and C. F. Gmachl, Mid-Infrared Quantum Cascade Lasers, Nature Photonics,
vol. 6, pp. 432-439, 2012.

E. Tournié and A. N. Baranov, Mid-Infrared Semiconductor Lasers: A Review, in Semiconductors and
Semimetals, C. Jagadish and E. R. Weber, eds., Volume 86, Advances in Semiconductor Lasers,
Academic Press/Elsevier, 2012, pp. 183-226.

READING LIST 867

A. Hugi, R. Maulini, and J. Faist, External Cavity Quantum Cascade Laser, Semiconductor Science
and Technology, vol. 25, 083001, 2010.

В. $. Williams, Terahertz Quantum-Cascade Lasers, Nature Photonics, vol. 1, pp. 517-525, 2007.

К. Paiella, ed., Intersubband Transitions in Quantum Structures, McGraw-Hill, 2006.

J. Еазь Е. Capasso, О. L. Sivco, С. Sirtori, A. L. Hutchinson, and А. У. Cho, Quantum Cascade
Laser, Science, vol. 264, pp. 553-556, 1994.

К. Е Kazarinov and R. А. Suris, Amplification of Electromagnetic Waves in a Semiconductor Super-
lattice, Soviet Physics-Semiconductors, vol. 5, рр. 707—709, 1971 [Fizika i Tekhnika Poluprovod-
nikov, vol. 5, pp. 797-800, 1971].

Г. Esaki and К. Tsu, Superlattice and Negative Differential Conductivity in Semiconductors, (ВМ
Journal of Research and Development, vol. 14, pp. 61-65, 1970.

Nanolasers

Q. Gu and Y. Fainman, Semiconductor Nanolasers, Cambridge University Press, 2017.

М. Кан, С. P. Dietrich, M. Schubert, I. О. W. Samuel, G. A. Turnbull, and М. С. Gather, Single
Cell Induced Optical Confinement in Biological Lasers, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics,
vol. 50, 084005, 2017.

S. Gwo and C.-K. Shih, Semiconductor Plasmonic Nanolasers: Current Status and Perspectives,
Reports on Progress in Physics, vol. 79, 086501, 2016.

M. I. Stockman, Quantum Nanoplasmonics, in D. L. Andrews, ed., Photonics: Scientific Foundations,
Technology and Applications, Volume П, Nanophotonic Structures and Materials, Wiley—Science
Wise, 2015.

М. T. Hill and М. С. Gather, Advances in Small Lasers, Nature Photonics, vol. 8, pp. 908-918, 2014.

S. Noda, Fundamentals of Photonic Crystals for Telecom Applications — Photonic Crystal Lasers,
in Г.Р. Kaminow, Т. Li, and A. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-A: Compo-
nents and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

R.-M. Ma, К. Е Oulton, У. J. Sorger, and X. Zhang, Plasmon Lasers: Coherent Light Source at
Molecular Scales, Laser & Photonics Review, vol. 7, pp. 1-21, 2013.

Y. Ma, X. Guo, X. Wu, L. Dai, and L. Tong, Semiconductor Nanowire Lasers, Advances in Optics
and Photonics, vol. 5, pp. 216-273, 2013.

R. F Oulton, V. J. Sorger, T. Zentgraf, R.-M. Ma, C. Gladden, L. Dai, G. Bartal, and X. Zhang,
Plasmon Lasers at Deep Subwavelength Scale, Nature, vol. 461, pp. 629-632, 2009.

М. A. Noginov, G. Zhu, А. М. Belgrave, В. Bakker, У. М. Shalaev, Е. Е, Narimanov, S. Stout,
E. Herz, T. Suteewong, and U. Wiesner, Demonstration of a Spaser-Based Nanolaser, Nature,
vol. 460, pp. 1110-1113, 2009.

M. T. Hill, Y.-S. Oei, B. Smalbrugge, Y. Zhu, T. de Vries, P. J. van Veldhoven, F. W. M. van Otten,
T. J. Eijkemans, J. Р. Turkiewicz, H. de Waardt, Е. J. Geluk, S.-H. Kwon, Y.-H. Lee, К. Notzel,
and M. K. Smit, Lasing in Metallic-Coated Nanocavities, Nature Photonics, vol. 1, pp. 589-594,
2007.

D. J. Bergman and M. I. Stockman, Surface Plasmon Amplification by Stimulated Emission of
Radiation: Quantum Generation of Coherent Surface Plasmons in Nanosystems, Physical Review
Letters, vol. 90, 027402, 2003.

Historical Articles

See also the reading list on historical articles and reprint collections in Chapter 16.

I. Akasaki, Fascinated Journeys into Blue Light; H. Amano, Growth of GaN on Sapphire by Low
Temperature Deposited Buffer Layer and Realization of P-Type GaN by Mg-Doping Followed
by LEEBI Treatment; 5. Nakamura, Background Story of the Invention of Efficient Blue InGaN
Light Emitting Diodes (Nobel Lectures in Physics, 2014).

Scientific Background on the Nobel Prize in Physics 2014: Efficient Blue Light-Emitting Diodes
Leading to Bright and Energy-Saving White Light Sources, Kungliga Vetenskapsakademien,
Compiled by the Class for Physics of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, рр. 1-9, 2014.

R. D. Dupuis and M. R. Krames, History, Development, and Applications of High-Brightness Visible
Light-Emitting Diodes, Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 26, pp. 1154-1171, 2008.

Zh. I. Alferov, Double Heterostructure Concept and its Applications in Physics, Electronics and
Technology (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 2000), in G. Ekspong, ed., Nobel Lectures in Physics

868 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES
1996-2000, World Scientific, 2003.

H. Kroemer, Quasi-Electric Fields and Band Offsets: Teaching Electrons New Tricks (Nobel Lecture
in Physics, 2000), in G. Ekspong, ed., Nobel Lectures, Physics 1996-2000, World Scientific, 2003.

Millennium issue, JEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 6, no. 6, 2000.

E. E. Loebner, Subhistories of the Light Emitting Diode, JEEE Transactions on Electron Devices,
vol. ED-23, pp. 675-699, 1976.

N. G. Basov, Semiconductor Lasers (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1964), in Nobel Lectures in Physics,
1963—1970, World Scientific, 1998, pp. 89-105.

T. M. Quist, R. H. Rediker, R. J. Keyes, W. E. Krag, B. Lax, A. L. McWhorter, and H. J. Zeiger,
Semiconductor Maser of GaAs, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 1, pp. 91-92, 1962.

М. Holonyak, Jr. and $. Е. Bevacqua, Coherent (Visible) Light Emission from Ga(As_,,P.,) Junctions,
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 1, pp. 82-83, 1962.

M. I. Nathan, W. P. Dumke, G. Burns, F. H. Dill, Jr., and G. Lasher, Stimulated Emission of Radiation
from GaAs p—n Junctions, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 1, pp. 62—64, 1962.

R. N. Hall, G. E. Fenner, J. D. Kingsley, T. J. Soltys, and R. O. Carlson, Coherent Light Emission
from GaAs Junctions, Physical Review Letters, vol. 9, рр. 366-368, 1962.

J. 1. Pankove and J. Е. Berkeyheiser, A Light Source Modulated at Microwave Frequencies, Proceed-
ings of the IRE, vol. 50, pp. 1976-1977, 1962.

J. I. Pankove, Tunneling-Assisted Photon Emission in Gallium Arsenide pn Junctions, Physical
Review Letters, vol. 9, pp. 283—285, 1962.

R. J. Keyes and T. M. Quist, Recombination Radiation Emitted by Gallium Arsenide, Proceedings of
the IRE, vol. 50, pp. 1822—1823, 1962.

J. R. Biard and G. E. Pittman, Semiconductor Radiant Diode, U.S. Patent 3,293,513, Patented De-
cember 20, 1966 (Filed August 8, 1962).

N. G. Basov, O. N. Krokhin, and Yu. M. Popov, Production of Negative-Temperature States in pn
Junctions of Degenerate Semiconductors, Soviet Physics-JETP, vol. 13, pp. 1320-1321, 1961
[Zhurnal Eksperimental’noi i Teoreticheskoi Fiziki, vol. 40, pp. 1879-1880, 1961].

M. G. A. Bernard and G. Duraffourg, Laser Conditions in Semiconductors, Physica Status Solidi,
vol. 1, pp. 699-703, 1961.

John von Neumann, in unpublished calculations sent to Edward Teller in September 1953, showed
that it was possible, in principle, to upset the equilibrium concentration of carriers in a semi-
conductor and thereby to obtain light amplification by stimulated emission, e.g., via the recom-
bination of electrons and holes injected into a p—n junction [see J. von Neumann, Notes on the
Photon-Disequilibrium-Amplification Scheme (JvN), Sept. 16, 1953, JEEE Journal of Quantum
Electronics, vol. QE-23, pp. 659-673, 1987].

PROBLEMS

18.1-5 LED Spectral Widths. Consider seven LED spectra drawn from Figs. 18.1-14 and Р18.1-5,
namely those centered at A, = 0.37, 0.53, 0.64, 0.91, 1.30, 1.93, and 2.25 ит. Graphically
estimate their spectral widths (FWHM) in units of nm, Hz, and eV. Compare your estimates
with the results calculated from the formulas provided in Exercise 18.1-3. Estimate the alloy

broadening in the LED spectrum centered at Л. = 0.53 jum in units of nm, Hz, and eV.
Figure P18.1-5 Spectral intensities
versus wavelength for InGaAsP LEDs
operating in the near-infrared region of
the spectrum. The peak intensities are
all normalized to the same value. The
Jit , р my spectral width generally increases as № ;

08 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 in accordance with (18.1-30).
Wavelength Л, (4m)

PROBLEMS 869

18.1-6 Extraction Efficiency for an LED. Derive an expression for 7., the efficiency for the
extraction of internal unpolarized light from an LED, that includes the angular dependence
of Fresnel reflection at the semiconductor—air boundary (refer to Sec. 6.2).

18.1-7 Coupling Light from an LED into an Optical Fiber. Calculate the fraction of optical
power emitted from an LED that is accepted by a step-index optical fiber of numerical
aperture NA = 0.1 in air and core refractive index 1.46 (refer to Sec. 10.1). Assume that the
LED has a planar surface, a refractive index n = 3.6, and an angular dependence of optical
power that is proportional to соз* (0). Assume further that the LED is bonded to the core of
the fiber and that the emission area is smaller than the fiber core.

18.2-1 Bandwidth of a Semiconductor Optical Amplifier. Use the data in Fig. 18.2-3(a) to plot
the full bandwidth of the InGaAsP SOA amplifier as a function of the injected-carrier con-
centration An. Determine an approximate linear formula for this bandwidth as a function
of An and, using the data in Fig. 18.2-3(5), plot the peak gain coefficient versus bandwidth.

18.2-2 Peak Gain Coefficient of a Semiconductor Optical Amplifier at T = 0° К.

(a) Show that the peak value y, of the gain coefficient yo(v) at T = 0° К is located at

(b) Obtain an analytical expression for the peak gain coefficient y, as a function of the
injected-carrier concentration An at T = 0° K.

(с) Plot y, versus An for an InGaAsP amplifier (A, = 1300 nm, n = 3.5, т, = 2.5 ns,
Me = 0.06 m9, ть, = 0.4 mo) for values of An in the range 1 x 1018 to 2 1018 ст-3.

(4) Compare these results with the data provided in Fig. 18.2-3(6).

*18.2-3 Gain Coefficient of a GaAs Semiconductor Optical Amplifier. A room-temperature (ТГ =
300° К) p-type GaAs SOA (Е, © 1.40 eV, ть = 0.07 то, ть, = 0.50 mo), with refractive
index п = 3.6, is doped (py = 1.2 x 1018) such that the radiative recombination lifetime
т, & 2 1$.

(a) Given the steady-state injected-carrier concentration An (which is controlled by the
injection rate R and the overall recombination time т), use (18.2-2)—(18.2-4) to compute
the gain coefficient ус (и) versus the photon energy hv, assuming that T = 0° К.
(b) Carry out the same calculation numerically, assuming that Г = 300° К.
(c) Plot the peak gain coefficient as a function of An for both cases.
(d) Determine the loss coefficient с and the transparency concentration Any using the
linear approximation model.
(e) Plot the full amplifier bandwidth (in Hz, nm, and eV) as a function of An for both cases.
(f) Compare your results with the gain coefficient and peak gain coefficient curves shown
in Fig. P18.2-3.
Е 300 Е 300
= 2x 10'8em™ —
А —
= 5
Е 200 ‚5 200
5 100 = 100
я Ti)
“АА:
7 [aw
0 А 0
1.38 1.40 1.42 1.44 hv (eV) 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
An (10'8ст 3)
(а) (b)

Figure P18.2-3 Gain coefficient and peak gain coefficient for a GaAs SOA. (Adapted from

М. В. Panish, Heterostructure Injection Lasers, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 64, pp. 1512—1540,

Fig. 4 ©1976 IEEE.)

870 CHAPTER 18 LEDS AND LASER DIODES

18.2-4 Bandgap Reduction Arising from Band-Tail States. The bandgap reduction AE, arising
from band-tail states in InGaAsP and GaAs can be empirically expressed as

AE, (eV) = (—1.6 x 1078) (р'/З +n"),

where п and р are the carrier concentrations (cm~*) provided by doping or carrier injection

or both.

(a) For p-type InGaAsP and GaAs, determine the concentration p that reduces the bandgap
by approximately 0.02 eV.

(b) For undoped InGaAsP and GaAs, determine the injected-carrier density An that re-
duces the bandgap by approximately 0.02 eV. Assume that n; is negligible.

(c) Compute E, + AE, and compare the result with the energy at which the gain coefficient
in Fig. P18.2-3(a) is zero on the low-frequency side.

18.2-5 Amplifier Gain and Bandwidth. GaAs has an intrinsic carrier concentration п; = 1.8 x 106
cm~3, a recombination lifetime т = 50 ns, a bandgap energy Е, = 1.42 eV, an effective
electron mass т. = 0.07 mp, and an effective hole mass m, = 0.50 тю. Assume that
T=0°K.

(a) Determine the center frequency, bandwidth, and peak net gain within the bandwidth for
a GaAs amplifier of length d = 200 wm, width w = 10 yum, and thickness [ = 2 ит,
when 1 mA of current is passed through the device.

(b) Determine the number of voice messages that can be supported by the bandwidth
determined above, given that each message occupies a bandwidth of 4 kHz.

(c) Determine the bit rate that can be passed through the amplifier given that each voice
channel requires 64 kb/s.

18.2-6 Transition Cross Section. Determine the transition cross section o(v) for GaAs as a func-
tion of An at T = 0° K. The probability density for stimulated emission or absorption is
oo(v), where ¢ is the photon-flux density. Why is the transition cross section less useful for
semiconductor optical amplifiers than for other laser amplifiers?

*18.2-7 Gain Profile. Consider a 1550-nm InGaAsP amplifier (n = 3.5) of the configuration shown
in Fig. 18.2-6, with identical antireflection coatings on its input and output facets. Calculate
the maximum reflectance of each of the facets that can be tolerated if it is desired to maintain
the variations in the gain profile arising from the frequency dependence of the Fabry—Perot
transmittance to less than 10% [refer to (7.1-30)].

18.3-1 Dependence of Laser-Diode Output Power on Refractive Index. Identify the terms in
the output photon flux ®, provided in (18.3-10) that depend on the refractive index of the
crystal.

18.3-2 Number of Longitudinal Modes. A current is injected into an InGaAsP diode of bandgap
energy E, = 0.91 eV and refractive index n = 3.5 such that the difference in Fermi levels is
Ere — Ер» = 0.96 eV. If the resonator is of length d = 250 ит and has no losses, determine
the maximum number of longitudinal modes that can oscillate.

18.3-3 Minimum Gain Required for Lasing. A 500-~m-long InGaAsP crystal operates at а
wavelength where its refractive index n = 3.5. Neglecting scattering and other losses,
determine the gain coefficient required to barely compensate for reflection losses at the
crystal boundaries.

*18.3-4 Modal Spacings with a Wavelength-Dependent Refractive Index. The frequency sep-
aration of the modes of a laser diode is complicated by the fact that the refractive index
is wavelength dependent, ie.,n = n(A,). A laser diode of length 430 jum oscillates at a
central wavelength Л. = 650 nm. Within the emission bandwidth, n(A,) may be assumed
to be linearly dependent on Ль [1.е., п(Ло) = no — a(Ao — Ac), Where по = п(Ае) = 3.4
and a = ап/ал.].

(a) The separation between the laser modes with wavelength near Л. is observed to be
АЛ = 0.12 nm. Explain why this does not correspond to the usual modal spacing
Vp = c/2d.

(b) Obtain an estimate for a.

(c) Explain the phenomenon of mode pulling in a gas laser and compare it with the effect
described above in semiconductor lasers.

CHAPTER
ee
PHOTODETECTORS
19.1 PHOTODETECTORS 873

А. External and Internal Photoeffects
B. General Properties
19.2 PHOTOCONDUCTORS 883
A. Intrinsic Photoconductors
B. Extrinsic Photoconductors
C. Heterostructure Photoconductors
19.3 PHOTODIODES 887
A. The р-п Photodiode
В. The р--п Photodiode
C. Heterostructure Photodiodes
19.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 895
A. Conventional Avalanche Photodiodes
В. History- and Position-Dependent Parameters
С. Single-Photon and Photon-Number-Resolving Detectors
19.5 ARRAY DETECTORS 907
19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 909
A. Photoelectron Noise
B. Gain Noise
C. Circuit Noise
D. Signal-to-Noise Ratio and Analog Receiver Sensitivity
E. Bit Error Rate and Digital Receiver Sensitivity
. a one
Heinrich Hertz (1857-1894) discovered the Siméon Denis Poisson (1781-1840) devel-
photoelectric effect in 1887; its origin was oped the fundamental probability distribution
explained by Einstein in 1905. that describes photodetector noise.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
871

CSC

A photodetector is a device whose electrical characteristics (e.g., current, voltage,
resistance) vary when exposed to light. By converting the energy of the absorbed
photons into a measurable form, it can be used to determine the photon flux (or op-
tical power) of a light beam. It can also be used to display temporal and/or spatial
interference between incident optical beams. Two principal classes of photodetectors
are in common use, photoelectric detectors and thermal detectors:

1. The operation of photoelectric detectors is based on the photoelectric effect,
also called the photoeffect. The absorption of photons by a material causes
electrons to transition to higher energy levels, resulting in mobile charge carriers.
Under the effect of an electric field, these carriers move and produce a mea-
surable electric current. The photoeffect takes two forms: external and internal.
The external photoeffect involves photoelectric emission, also called photo-
emission, in which the photogenerated electrons escape from the material as free
electrons. The internal photoeffect involves photoconductivity, in which the
excited carriers remain within the material and serve to increase its conductivity.

2. Thermal detectors operate by converting photon energy into heat energy via any
of a number of effects. Bolometers and microbolometers operate on the basis
of temperature-induced changes in the resistance of a material while thermo-
couples and thermopiles rely on the thermoelectric effect, which is associated
with the direct conversion of a temperature difference into a voltage difference
across two dissimilar juxtaposed metals. Pyroelectric detectors, which are re-
sponsive to the rate of change of temperature, develop a surface voltage dif-
ference when heated. This is caused by a modification of the atomic positions
within the crystal, which alter its polarization density. Finally, Golay cells are
enclosures that contain an infrared absorbing gas and a flexible membrane. In-
cident infrared radiation heats the gas, which increases its pressure and deforms
the membrane. The level of an auxiliary source of light that reflects from the
membrane registers its motion and thus reveals the infrared power incident on
the cell. Thermal detectors have long been considered to be inefficient and slow
in comparison with photoelectric detectors because of the time required to effect
a temperature change. Yet recent advances in manufacturing and miniaturization
have dramatically improved the performance of thermal array detectors so that
they are now viable contenders for imaging applications in the mid-infrared
spectral region.

This Chapter

This chapter is devoted principally to a study of various photoelectric detectors that find
use in photonics. We begin in Sec. 19.1 with a discussion of the external and internal
photoelectric effects and set forth several important general properties of photodetec-
tors, including quantum efficiency, responsivity, and response time. We then direct
our attention to three types of semiconductor photodetectors that rely on the inter-
nal photoeffect: photoconductors, photodiodes, and avalanche photodiodes, which are
considered in Secs. 19.2, 19.3, and 19.4, respectively. Array detectors, which produce
electronic versions of optical images, are discussed in Sec. 19.5.

To assess the performance of photodetectors in various applications, it is important
to understand their noise properties, and these are set forth in Sec. 19.6. Noise in
the output circuit of a photoelectric detector arises from several sources: the photon
character of the light itself (photon noise), the conversion of photons to photocarriers
(photoelectron noise), the generation of secondary carriers by internal amplification
mechanisms (gain noise), and receiver circuit noise. The chapter closes with a discus-
sion of the performance of analog and digital optical receivers.

872

19.1 PHOTODETECTORS 873
19.1 PHOTODETECTORS
A. External and Internal Photoeffects
Photoelectric Emission
If the energy of a photon illuminating a material in vacuum is sufficiently large, the
excited electron can escape over the potential barrier of the surface of the material
and be liberated into the vacuum as a free electron. This process, called photoelectric
emission or photoemission, is illustrated in Fig. 19.1-1(a) for a metal. An incident
photon of energy hv releases a free electron from within the partially filled conduction
band. A brief delay in the emission is incurred by the interaction of the outgoing
electron with the remaining ion, as well as by transport, screening, and scattering
effects. The delay time depends on the particular metal and on the photon energy,
but it is roughly in the range of 100 attoseconds.
Photoemission from a metal. Energy conservation requires that electrons emitted
from below the Fermi level, where they are plentiful, have a maximum kinetic energy
Emax = hv — И, (19.1-1)
where Фе photoelectric work function W is the energy difference between the vacuum
level and the Fermi level of the metal. Equation (19.1-1) is known as the Einstein
photoemission equation. Only if the electron initially lies right at the Fermi level can
it receive the maximum kinetic energy specified in (19.1-1); the removal of a deeper-
lying electron requires additional energy to transport it to the Fermi level, thereby
reducing the kinetic energy of the liberated electron. The lowest work function for a
metal (Cs) is about 2 eV, so that optical detectors based on the external photoeffect
from pure metals are useful in the visible and ultraviolet regions of the spectrum, but
not in the infrared.
Free Vacuum Free
electron Next higher band electron Vacuum
Photon Photon Conduction band | x |
WV W WWW> | W
hv hv . +
__L____ Репа level р
Fermi level ~ ГЫ
(a) Metal (b) Semiconductor
Figure 19.1-1 Photoelectric emission (a) from a metal, and (6) from an intrinsic semiconductor.
The bandgap energy and electron affinity of the material are denoted E, and y, respectively, and W is
the photoelectric work function. All three of these quantities are usually specified in eV.
Photoemission from a semiconductor. Photoelectric emission from an intrinsic
semiconductor is portrayed schematically in Fig. 19.1-1(5). Photoelectrons are usually
released from the valence band, where electrons are plentiful. The formula analogous
to (19.1-1) is
Emax = hv — М = Ви — (E, + x), (19.1-2)
where Е, is the bandgap energy and x is the electron affinity of the material, 1.е.,
the energy difference between the vacuum level and the bottom of the conduction
band. The energy Е, + x can be as small as 1.4 eV for certain materials (e.g., the
multialkali compound NaKCsSb, which forms the basis for the so-called S—20-type
photocathode), so that semiconductor photoemissive detectors can operate in the near
infrared, as well as in the visible and ultraviolet.

874 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

Negative-electron-affinity materials. Furthermore, negative-electron-affinity
(NEA) semiconductors have been developed in which the conduction-band edge
lies above the vacuum level so that hv need only exceed Е, for photoemission
to occur. This is achieved by depositing a thin n-type or metallic layer on p-type
material, which causes the bands to bend at the surface of the material. NEA detectors,
such as Cs-coated GaAs, are therefore responsive to slightly longer near-infrared
wavelengths, and also exhibit improved quantum efficiency and reduced dark current.
Photocathodes constructed from inhomogeneous materials or oxides, such as the S—
1-type photocathode, can also be used in the near infrared, but only for wavelengths
Ло < Тим.

Vacuum photodiodes and photomultiplier tubes. In their simplest form, pho-
todetectors based on photoelectric emission take the form of vacuum tubes called
vacuum photodiodes or phototubes. Electrons are emitted from the surface of a
photoemissive material called the photocathode and travel to an electrode (anode),
which is maintained at a higher electrical potential. The photocathode can be opaque
and operate in reflection mode [Fig. 19.1-2(a)], or semitransparent and operate in
transmission mode. As a result of the electron transport between the cathode and anode,
a current proportional to the photon flux, known as the photocurrent, is created in
the circuit. The photoemitted electrons may also create a cascade of electrons via the
process of secondary emission [Fig. 19.1-2(b)]. This occurs when the photoelectrons
emitted from the photocathode impact other specially placed cesiated-oxide or semi-
conductor surfaces in the tube, called dynodes, which are maintained at successively
higher potentials. A device such as this, known as a photomultiplier tube (PMT),
offers low-noise amplification of the generated photocurrent with gains as high as 10°
(Example 19.6-2).

Photocathode Photon Electron

Photocathode Photon Anode = — -

Dynodes _
к мм мы

@ v | 6) =

С Photon :

Froopackadeeay ora : Electron

< и cascade
= д Capillaries

© SS @ Vv
Figure 19.1-2 (a) Photon detection in a vacuum photodiode with a photocathode operated in
reflection mode. (b) Photon detection and electron multiplication at the dynodes in a photomultiplier
tube (PMT). (c) Cutaway view of a microchannel plate (MCP). (d) Photon detection and electron
multiplication in a single capillary of an MCP endowed with a semitransparent imaging photocathode.

Applications of PMTs. Though PMTs usually have modest quantum efficiencies
and require high voltages to operate, they find use in many venues. Their high gain, low
dark current, low noise, and fast response time endows them with the ability to detect

19.1 PHOTODETECTORS 875
individual optical photons (Sec. 19.4C). With diameters ranging from millimeters to
half a meter, PMTs are used in applications as diverse as oil-well logging (they can
operate at high temperatures) and gamma cameras. Gamma and beta rays are readily
detected with PMTs by making use of scintillator materials that convert these high-
energy particles into visible photons via radioluminescence and betaluminescence,
respectively (Sec. 14.5A). The Super-Kamiokande neutrino-detection experiment in
Japan makes use of more than 11 000 PMTs, each with a diameter of 1/2 т, that carpet
the interior walls of an underground tank containing 50000 tons of water. Neutrinos
interact with the constituent atoms of the water to produce charged particles that travel
faster than the speed of light in water, thereby generating blue Cerenkov radiation
pulses that are detected by the PMTs. At the other end of the size spectrum, //-РМТз
measuring roughly 1-cm? in area by 2-mm high, and weighing only about 1/2 g, offer
gains approaching 107. These devices find use in portable photosensing instruments for
applications such as biomedical point-of-care testing, biochemical micro-total analysis,
and environmental monitoring.

Microchannel plates. A compact imaging device that makes use of the secondary-
emission principle is the microchannel plate (MCP) displayed in Fig. 19.1-2(c). It
consists of an array of millions of capillaries (of internal diameter = 10 ит) created
in a glass plate (of thickness = 1 mm). Both faces of the plate are coated with thin
metallic films that act as electrodes, across which a voltage is applied. The interior wall
of each capillary is coated with a material that facilitates electron secondary emission
so it behaves as a continuous dynode, multiplying the photocurrent generated at that
lateral position in the MCP [Fig. 19.1-2(d)]. This allows the local photon flux of a
faint image to be converted to a substantial electron-flux image that can be directly
measured. Moreover, if desired the electron-flux image can be reconverted into an
(amplified) photon-flux image by applying a phosphor coating to the rear electrode
that then produces light via cathodoluminescence (Sec. 14.5A); this combination is
known as an image intensifier.

Photoconductivity

Most modern photodetectors operate on the basis of the internal photoeffect, in which
the photoexcited carriers (electrons and holes) remain within the sample. Photocon-
ductive detectors rely directly on the light-induced increase in the electrical conduc-
tivity of a material. The absorption of a photon by an intrinsic semiconductor, for
example, results in the generation of a free electron excited from the valence band
to the conduction band (Fig. 19.1-3). Concurrently, a hole is generated in the valence
band. The application of an electric field to the material results in the transport of both
electrons and holes through the material and, as a consequence, the production of an
electric current in the electrical circuit.

Photon Е р .

AV hy Eg Figure 19.1 -3 Electron—hole pair photogeneration

hv | in an intrinsic semiconductor.
(lire —
Hole

Semiconductor photodiodes are p—n junction structures that are also based on the
internal photoeffect. Photons absorbed in the depletion layer of the device generate
electrons and holes, which are subjected to the local electric field within that layer.
The two carriers drift in opposite directions. This transport process induces an electric
current in the external circuit.

876 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

Some photodetectors also incorporate an internal gain mechanism so that the pho-
tocurrent is amplified, thereby making the signal more easily detectable. Avalanche
photodiodes (APDs) are devices in which an internal amplification process takes place
via carrier multiplication within the detector. If the depletion-layer electric field in a
photodiode is increased sufficiently by applying a large reverse-bias voltage across the
junction, the electrons and holes generated may themselves acquire sufficient energy
to liberate additional electrons and holes by a process called impact ionization, which
is the inverse of Auger recombination (Fig. 17.1-18). An APD can be used as an
alternative to, or in conjunction with, a laser preamplifier [see, e.g., Fig. 25.1-5(c)].
Each of these amplification mechanisms carries its own form of noise, however.

Semiconductor photoelectric detectors with gain therefore involve the following

three basic processes:

1. Generation: Absorbed photons generate free carriers.

2. Transport: An applied electric field causes these carriers to move, resulting in a
circuit current.

3. Gain: In an avalanche photodiode, a large applied electric fields imparts suffi-
cient energy to the carriers so that they in turn free additional carriers by impact
ionization; this internal amplification process enhances the responsivity of the
detector, but also introduces noise.

Organic photodetectors. Organic semiconductors are usually either small organic
molecules or conjugated polymer chains. The lowest-unoccupied molecular orbital
(LUMO) and the highest-occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) may be viewed as anal-
ogous to the conduction- and valence-band edges of inorganic semiconductors, re-
spectively (Sec. 17.1B). Photon absorption leads to the generation of charge carriers.
Organic photodetectors (OPDs) can be configured as photoconductors, photodiodes,
or phototransistors and can operate over a broad range of wavelengths that stretches
from the near infrared to the ultraviolet. They are often fabricated as heterojunctions
comprising conjugated organic semiconductors with different electron affinities.

Much as with OLEDs (Sec. 18.1E), OPDs offer a number of salutary features:

they can be thin, lightweight, mechanically flexible, semitransparent, responsive across
large portions of the optical spectrum, and easy to fabricate in large sizes. Printed OPDs
can convert flexible substrates (e.g., paper, plastic, or glass) into smart surfaces and
can be fashioned into wearable biomedical devices. In the current state of their devel-
opment, however, OPD parameters such as dark current, responsivity, and life span are
generally inferior to those of silicon-based photodetectors, although not substantially
so.

B. General Properties

Certain general features are associated with all photodetectors. Before considering the
details of specific photoelectric detectors of interest in photonics, we examine three
such general features: quantum efficiency, responsivity, and response time. Photodetec-
tors and semiconductor sources are inverse devices and these three features also have
their counterparts in the domain of semiconductor sources (Secs. 18.1B and 18.3B).
Indeed, the same materials are often used to fabricate semiconductor photodetectors
and semiconductor sources (see, e.g., Figs. 17.1-7, 17.1-8, and 18.1-16).

Quantum Efficiency

The quantum efficiency 7 (0 < 7 < 1) of a semiconductor photodetector is the
probability that a single photon incident on the device generates a photocarrier pair that
contributes to the detector current. When many photons are incident, as is usually the

194 PHOTODETECTORS 877
case, 7 becomes the flux of generated electron-hole pairs that contribute to the detector
current divided by the flux of incident photons. For non-semiconductor photodetectors,
the photon detection efficiency (PDE) 77 is defined as the probability that a single
photon incident on the device generates a detectable electrical current in the output
circuit. For detectors that operate on the basis of the external photoeffect, such as
the vacuum photodiode and the photomultiplier tube, the quantum efficiency 77 is the
probability that a single incident photon generates a free photoelectron.

Not all incident photons produce electron-hole pairs in a semiconductor photode-
tector because not all of them reach the photosensitive region and are absorbed. As
illustrated in Fig. 19.1-4, some of the photons are reflected at the surface of the detec-
tor via Fresnel reflection while others fail to be absorbed because the photosensitive
material has insufficient thickness (the rate of photon absorption in a semiconductor
material was considered in Sec. 17.2C). Furthermore, some electron-hole pairs pro-
duced near the photodetector surface quickly recombine because of the abundance of
recombination centers at surfaces, and are therefore not available to contribute to the
detector current.

Photons Е Е hv photon tux Ф
—
и их Reflected Figure 19.1-4 Effect of sur-
| 1/а photon flux face reflection and incomplete

d | absorption (arising from an in-

sufficient thickness of photosen-

| sitive material) on the detector
ee | quantum efficiency 77.
Photosensitive —\ Transmitted
region photon flux
x x
For semiconductor photoelectric detectors, the quantum efficiency 7 can therefore
be written as

n= (1-8) -¢-[1—exp(—ad)], (19.1-3)
Photoelectric-Detector
Quantum Efficiency
where & is the power reflectance at the surface of the photodetector, ¢ is the fraction of
electron-hole pairs that successfully contributes to the detector photocurrent, a is the
absorption coefficient of the photosensitive material (em!) discussed in Sec. 17.2C,
and d is the thickness of the photosensitive region. Equation (19.1-3) is thus a product

of three factors:

= The first factor, J = (1 — Х), represents the power transmittance at the surface

of the device. The transmittance can be increased, for example, by the use of
antireflection coatings. Some definitions of the quantum efficiency 7 exclude the
effects of reflection at the surface, which must then be considered separately.

= The second factor ¢ is the fraction of electron-hole pairs that successfully avoid

recombination at the material surface so they can potentially contribute to the
useful photocurrent. Surface recombination can be reduced by careful material
growth and device design.
: а — со —
= The third factor, |) e~°* dx/ | e~°* dx = [1 — exp(—ad)], represents the
fraction of the photon flux absorbed in the bulk of the photosensitive material.
The device should have a value of d that is sufficiently large so this factor is
maximized, subject to other constraints.
Additional loss is also incurred if the light is not properly focused onto the photosen-
sitive region of the detector.

878 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
Dependence of quantum efficiency on wavelength. The quantum efficiency 7 is a
function of wavelength principally because the absorption coefficient a is wavelength
dependent (Fig. 17.2-3). The characteristics of the semiconductor material thus deter-
mine the spectral window within which 77 is large. For sufficiently large values of the
free-space wavelength Ль, 7) is small because absorption cannot occur for A, > № =
hco/ Eg, (the photon energy is then smaller than the bandgap energy and the material is
transparent). The bandgap wavelength Л. is thus the long-wavelength photodetection
limit for a semiconductor material. Representative values of Е, and A, are presented in
Table 17.1-2 and displayed in Figs. 17.1-7 and 17.1-8 for representative semiconductor
materials of interest in photonics. For sufficiently small values of Ло, 7 also decreases
because most photons are then absorbed near the surface of the device (for a = 10%
cm~!, for example, most of the light is absorbed within a distance 1/a = 1 ит). The
recombination lifetime is quite short near the surface, so the photocarriers recombine
before being collected.
Resonant-cavity photodetectors. The quantum efficiency 7 may be enhanced by
constructing a detector configuration in which the light can interact with the photosen-
sitive material on multiple passes. This is equivalent to increasing the photodetector
depth d, which increases the absorption and reduces the transmitted photon flux. This
may be achieved in practice by placing the photodetector inside a resonant cavity,
which traps the light and thus increases the quantum efficiency, but it does so at the
expense of restricting the bandwidth and extending the response time.
Plasmonic photodetectors. Another approach for augmenting the quantum effi-
ciency 7 of a semiconductor photodetector relies on endowing the photosensitive
material with metallic nanostructures that have the ability to scatter, concentrate, and
guide light at the nanoscale, as discussed in Chapter 8:
= The presence of metallic nanoparticles at the upper surface of the semiconductor
material can result in enhanced trapping of the incident light in the photosensitive
layer via high-angle, multiple scattering. Increasing the effective optical path
length in this manner is especially useful for structures such as thin-film solar
cells. The scattering of light by metallic nanoparticles is detailed in Sec. 8.2C.
= Metallic nanoparticles embedded in the interior of the semiconductor material
can serve as resonant optical antennas that trap and concentrate light in the form
of localized surface plasmons. Such modes generate near-field radiation, such as
optical dipole waves, that in turn can produce electron-hole pairs. The properties
of optical antennas are discussed in Sec. 8.2D.
= A corrugated metallic surface placed at the lower surface of the semiconductor
material can trap light in the form of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) that
propagate in the plane of the photosensitive layer. SPPs at a metal-—dielectric
boundary are considered in Sec. 8.2B.
Responsivity
The responsivity of a photodetector relates the electric current i, flowing in the de-
vice circuit to the optical power P incident on it. If every photon were to generate a
photocarrier pair in the device, a photon flux ® (photons per second) would produce
an electron flux (electrons per second) in the photodetector circuit that corresponds to
a short-circuit electric current 7, = e®. Thus, an optical power Р = hy ® (watts) at
optical frequency и would give rise to an electric current 7, = eP/hv.
However, since the fraction of photons that produces detected electrons is 7 rather
than unity, the electric current is
ip — ned = TP = Rp. (19.1-4)
hy

19.1 PHOTODETECTORS 879

The proportionality factor between the electric current and the optical power, R =
„/Р, has units of A/W and is called the photodetector responsivity:

№. (19.1-5)

hy 1.24 Photodetector Responsivity

(А/М; A, in um)

It is important to distinguish the photodetector responsivity (A/W) from the LED

responsivity (W/A) defined in (18.1-29).

The responsivity is linearly proportional to both the quantum efficiency 7 and the
free-space wavelength Ло, as is evident from (19.1-5) and Fig. 19.1-5. An appreciation
for the order of magnitude of the responsivity is gained by setting 7 = 1 and A, =
1.24 wm in (19.1-5), whereupon К = 1 A/W = 1 nA/nW.

10
12
еее 0.8 Е
3 03 ——— 0.6 5 .
2 Е Figure 19.1-5 Responsivity В (A/W) versus
206 048 wavelength Ло, with the quantum efficiency 7
Bo, И = аз a parameter. For 7 = 1, the responsivity is
Е R=1A/Wat A, = 1.24 um.
02 0.2
0
08 10 12 14 1.6
Wavelength Л, (дп)

The proportionality of К to A, is a consequence of the fact that the responsivity is
defined on the basis of optical power, whereas most photodetectors generate currents
proportional to the photon flux ®. For a given photon flux Ф = P/hy = PX,/hc,
(corresponding to a given photodetector current #,), the product PA, is fixed so that an
increase in Ло requires a commensurate decrease in P, thereby leading to an increase in
the responsivity. Indeed, some thermal detectors are responsive to optical power rather
than to photon flux, causing К to be independent of Ло.

The region over which R increases with A, is limited, however, inasmuch as the
wavelength dependence of 77 comes into play at both long and short wavelengths, as
discussed earlier. The responsivity can also be degraded if the detector is presented
with an excessively large optical power. This condition, known as detector saturation,
limits the linear dynamic range of the detector, which is the range over which it
responds to the incident optical power in a linear fashion.

Devices with gain. The formulas presented above are predicated on the assumption
that each photocarrier pair produces a charge e in the photodetector circuit. However,
devices that exhibit gain can produce a charge 4 in the circuit that differs from e. The
gain G is defined as the number of circuit electrons generated per photocarrier pair,

а = д/е. (19.1-6)
The gain can be either greater than or less than unity, as will be seen subsequently.

In the presence of gain, the formulas for the photocurrent and responsivity presented
in (19.1-4) and (19.1-5), respectively, must be modified. Substituting д = Ge for e in

880 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
these equations, respectively, yields
. GeP
tp = nq® = nGeb = ee (19.1-7)
hy Photocurrent with Gain
and
Ge А
R= 9. (19.1-8)
hv 1.24 Responsivity with Gain
(A/W; A, in um)
The gain of the device G is to be distinguished from the photodetector quantum ef-
ficiency 7, which is the probability that an incident photon produces a detectable
photocarrier pair. Other useful measures of photodetector behavior, such as signal-
to-noise ratio and receiver sensitivity, await discussion of detector noise properties,
presented in Sec. 19.6.
Response Time
Transit-time spread. A constant electric field Е applied to a semiconductor (or
metal) causes its free charge carriers to accelerate. In the course of doing so, they
encounter frequent collisions with lattice ions moving about their equilibrium positions
via thermal motion, as well as imperfections in the crystal lattice associated with
impurity ions. These collisions cause the carriers to suffer random decelerations; the
result is motion at an average velocity rather than at a constant acceleration. The mean
velocity of a carrier is given by у = ar,,;, where а = e&/m is the acceleration
imparted by the electric field and т.» is the mean time between collisions, which serves
as a relaxation time. The net result is that the carrier drifts in the direction of the electric
field with a mean drift velocity v = ет„Е/т, which is conventionally written in the
form
v= pe, (19.1-9)
where ju = eT,.,/m is known as the carrier mobility.

Ramo’s theorem. The carrier motion in the photodetector creates a current in its
external circuit. To determine the magnitude of the current i(t), consider an electron—
hole pair generated (by photon absorption, for example) at an arbitrary position x in
a semiconductor material of length w, to which a voltage V is applied, as shown in
Fig. 19.1-6(a). We restrict our attention to motion in the x direction and invoke ап
energy argument. If a carrier of charge Q (a hole of charge Q = e or an electron of
charge ©) = —e) moves a distance 4х in the time dt under the influence of an electric
field of magnitude Е = V/w, the work done is —-QE dx = —Q(V/w) ах. This work
must equal the energy provided by the external circuit, i(t)V dt. Thus, i(t)V dt =
—Q(V/w) dx, which leads to i(t) = —(Q/w)(da/dt) = —(Q/w)v(t). A carrier
moving with drift velocity v(t) in the «x direction therefore creates a current in the
external circuit characterized by Ramo’s theorem:

i(t) = 2 vay, (19.1-10)
и! Ramo’s Theorem

19.1 PHOTODETECTORS 881
i(t
у i(t) ” a
Vo
0 x Ww OC ev, [м ev, |W
x
Electron io(t)
Hole
—— .
ip(t)
t t
(a) (b)
Figure 19.1-6 (а) An electron-hole pair is generated at the position x. The hole drifts to the left
with constant velocity м, and the electron drifts to the right with constant velocity v.. The process
terminates when the carriers reach the edges of the material. ($) The hole current i;,(¢), electron
current i.(t), and total current i(t) induced in the circuit. The total charge induced in the circuit per
carrier pair is e.

Assuming that the hole moves with constant velocity м, to the left, and the electron
moves with constant velocity м, to the right, (19.1-10) provides that the hole current
is i, = —(e)(—v,)/w = ev,/w and the electron current is ig = —(—e)ye/w =
ev. /w, as illustrated in Fig. 19.1-6(b). Each carrier contributes to the current as long
as it is moving. If the carriers continue their motion until they reach the edges of the
material, the hole moves for a duration х/м, while the electron moves for a duration
(и — x)/v. [Fig. 19.1-6(a)]. In semiconductors, v. is generally larger than м» so that
the overall duration of the response is x/v,. The finite duration of the current is known
as the transit-time spread; it is an important limiting factor for the speed of operation
(bandwidth) of all semiconductor photodetectors.

Charge generated in external circuit. One might be inclined to argue that the
charge generated in an external circuit should be 2e when a photon generates an
electron-hole pair in a photodetector material, since there are two charge carriers. In
fact, the charge generated is e, as is demonstrated by calculating the total charge q
induced in the external circuit from the sum of the areas under 7, and 2):

Vp т М. М — т х и-т
и) =е. (19.1-11)
W Vi, и Ve w и
This result is independent of the position x at which the electron-hole pair was created.

Uniform generation of carrier pairs. The transit-time spread is far more severe if
the electron-hole pairs are generated uniformly throughout the material rather than at a
single point x, as can be understood from Fig. 19.1-7 and Prob. 19.1-4. For м» < Ve, the
full width of the transit-time spread is then w/v, rather than х /уь. This occurs because
uniform illumination produces carrier pairs at all locations, including at x = w, the
location at which the holes have the farthest to travel before being able to recombine
atx = 0.

882 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
ВТО) i,(2) i(t)
Ne(V,+V;,)/W
Nev,/w
+ =
Nev, |w Nev, м
0 w/v, 1 0 wiv, г 0 w/v, w/v, 1
Figure 19.1-7 Hole current 5, (#), electron current 7.(¢), and total current i(t) induced in the
photodetector circuit for electron-hole generation by N photons uniformly distributed between 0
and w (Prob. 19.1-4). The tail in the total current results from the motion of the slow holes. The
total current 7(t) can be viewed as the impulse response function (see Appendix В, Sec. B.1) of a
uniformly illuminated detector subject to transit-time spread.

Summary

Ramo’s theorem demonstrates that the charge delivered to the external circuit of a

semiconductor photodetector by carrier motion within the photodetector material

is not provided instantaneously, but rather occupies an extended time. It is as if

the motion of the charge carriers in the material pulls charge slowly from the wire

on one side of the device and pushes it slowly into the wire on the other side, so
that each charge passing through the external circuit is spread out in time.
Ohm’s law. In the presence of a uniform charge density о , rather than a single point
charge ©), the total charge in the photodetector material is oAw, where A is the cross-
sectional area [Fig. 19.1-6(a)]. From (19.1-10), the current density in the x direction is
then J(t) = i(t)/A = —(eAw/Aw)v(t) = —ом(®. The well-known vector form of
this equation is
Jd = ov. (19.1-12)
Current Density
Combining (19.1-12) with (19.1-9) yields J = oF, where о is the conductivity of the
medium,
с = ви = €0 Ton /m = Ne? 7..,/m; (19.1-13)
N is the number of carriers per unit volume [see (8.2-3) and (8.2-17)].

More generally, Ohm/’s law takes the form of a relationship between the current-
density and electric-field vectors, J and €, respectively, mediated by the second-rank
conductivity tensor о’:

д=о&. (19.1-14)

Ohm’s Law

For charge carried by a homogeneous conductive medium with cross-sectional area A

and length w, J = o£ can be written as i = (0A/w)Ew = (oA/w)V = GV =

V/R, where G and R are the conductance and resistance of the material, respectively.
In this configuration, Ohm’s law takes its beloved form

V=ik. (19.1-15)

19.2 PHOTOCONDUCTORS 883
RC time constant. The resistance В and capacitance C’ of the photodetector, along
with that of its circuitry, give rise to another response time called the RC time constant,
Tro = RC. The resistance/capacitance combination serves to integrate the current
at the photodetector output, thereby increasing the duration of the impulse response
function. In the presence of transit-time and an RC time-constant, the overall impulse
response function is determined by convolving the current i(¢) displayed in Fig. 19.1-7
with the exponential function (1/RC) exp(—t/RC) (Sec. В.1). It is worthy of note
that photodetectors of different types may exhibit other specific limitations on their
bandwidths, which require consideration on a case-by-case basis. As a final point, we
mention that photodetectors fabricated with a given material and structure sometimes
exhibit a fixed gain—bandwidth product, in which case increasing the gain results in a
decrease of the bandwidth and vice versa. This tradeoff between gain and frequency
response is associated with the time required for the gain process to take place.
19.2 PHOTOCONDUCTORS
When photons are absorbed in a semiconductor, mobile charge carriers are generated
(ideally an electron-hole pair for every absorbed photon). The electrical conductivity
of the material o increases in proportion to the photon flux ®. An electric field applied
to the material by an external voltage source causes the electrons and holes to be
transported. This in turn results in a measurable electric current in the circuit, as
illustrated in Fig. 19.2-1(a). Photoconductive detectors operate by registering either
the photocurrent 2,, which is proportional to the photon flux ®, or the voltage drop
across a load resistor К placed in series with the circuit.
A. Intrinsic Photoconductors
If the photon energy is greater than the bandgap of the semiconductor, photons are
absorbed via interband transitions [Fig. 17.2-4(a)]. A photoconductive device may take
the form of a slab or a thin film. The anode and cathode contacts are often interdigitated
on the same surface of the device to minimize the transit time [Fig. 19.2-1(6)]. At the
same time, the photon flux reaching the photosensitive material can be maximized by
directing the light to the opposite surface if the insulating substrate has a sufficiently
large bandgap so that it is not absorptive.
у
hv
Photons hv Electrodes l= :
LL): | ХИ
|
: hv
и
(а) (b)

Figure 19.2-1 The photoconductive detector. (a) Photogenerated carrier pairs move in response to
the applied voltage У, generating a photocurrent 4, proportional to the incident photon flux ®. (5) The
interdigitated electrode structure of this device is designed to minimize the carrier transit time (and
thereby maximize the bandwidth) while maximizing the light reaching the photosensitive material.

884 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

The increase in conductivity arising from a photon flux ® (photons per second)
illuminating a semiconductor volume WA [Fig. 19.2-1(a)] is calculated as follows. А
fraction 7 of the incident photon flux is absorbed and gives rise to excess electron-hole
pairs. The pair-production rate К (per unit volume per unit time) is thus R = 7®/wA.
If 7 is the excess-carrier recombination lifetime, in accordance with (17.1-23) electrons
are lost at the rate Ап/т where An is the electron concentration. Under steady-state
conditions both rates are equal so that К = Ап/т and An = nr®/wA. The increase
in the carrier concentration An is accompanied by an increase in the charge density
Age = eAn, and thus, in accordance with (19.1-13), by an increase in the conductivity
Ao = pAo = epAn, so that

до = ИТ + Hi) ay (19.2-1)
wA
where ие and и» are the electron and hole mobilities, respectively. In accordance with
(19.2-1), the increase in conductivity is proportional to the photon flux, as expected.

Ohm’s law (19.1-14) dictates that the photogenerated current density is given by
Jp = Ao Е. Combining this with (19.2-1) and (19.1-9), which provides ve = jie Е and
м, = иь В, gives „Л, = [пет (м + м») /мА] ®, which corresponds to an electric current
tp = ЛА = [neT(ve + м) /м] ®. Им, < ve, and if the formula is cast in terms of the
electron transit time across the sample те = w/ve, we finally obtain

lp © П(т/те)еФ. (19.2-2)
Comparison with (19.1-7) shows that the ratio т/т. in (19.2-2) corresponds to the
detector gain G, for reasons we now proceed to elucidate.
Gain. The responsivity of a photoconductor with gain is given by (19.1-8). Simply
viewed, the device exhibits internal gain because the excess-carrier recombination
lifetime т and the transit time т. differ in general. Suppose that electrons travel faster
than holes and that 7 is very long. As the electron and hole are transported to opposite
sides of the photoconductor (Fig. 19.2-1), the electron completes its trip sooner than
the hole. The requirement of current continuity then forces the external circuit to
immediately provide another electron, which enters the device from the wire at the
left. This new electron moves quickly toward the right, again completing its trip before
the hole reaches the left edge (or is released from a trap). This process continues until
the electron recombines with the hole, which requires a long time т.

A single photon absorption can therefore result in an electron passing through the
external circuit many times. The expected number of trips that the electron makes
before the process terminates is

G=T/t, (19.2-3)
where т is the excess-carrier recombination lifetime and т. = w/v. is the electron
transit time across the sample. The charge delivered to the circuit by a single electron—
hole pair is then 4 = Ge > е so that the device exhibits gain.

At the other extreme, the recombination lifetime may be sufficiently short such that
the carriers recombine before reaching the edge of the material. This can occur if there
is a ready availability of carriers of the opposite type for recombination to take place.
In that case т < те and the gain is less than unity so that, on average, each carrier
pair contributes only a fraction of the electronic charge e to the circuit. Charge is, of
course, conserved so that the many carrier pairs present deliver an integral number of
electronic charges to the circuit.

The photoconductor gain G = 7/7, can therefore be interpreted as the fraction of
the sample length traversed by the average excited carrier before it undergoes recombi-
nation. The transit time 7, is determined from the length of the device and the applied

19.2 PHOTOCONDUCTORS 885
voltage via (19.1-9) and те = w/v.; typical values of w = 1 mm and м, = 107 cm/s
yield т. = 10-8 s. The recombination lifetime т can range from 10-13 $ to many
seconds, depending on the photoconductor material and doping [see (17.1-24)]. Thus,
the gain G can assume a broad range of values, stretching from below unity to well
above unity, depending on the parameters of the material, the size of the device, and
the applied voltage. However, the gain of a photoconductor generally cannot exceed
10° because of the restrictions imposed by space-charge-limited current flow, impact
ionization, and dielectric breakdown.

The process of electron-hole recombination is actually random so that the implicit
assumption of deterministic photoconductor gain invoked above can be too simplistic.
In those circumstances, a more realistic model must be used (Prob. 19.6-4).

Spectral response. The spectral sensitivity of a photoconductive detector is gov-
erned principally by the wavelength dependence of the quantum efficiency 7, as dis-
cussed in Sec. 19.1B. Different semiconductors have different long-wavelength pho-
todetection limits A, (Table 17.1-2). Interband transitions in elemental, binary, and
ternary semiconductor photoconductors allow operation into the mid infrared (in con-
trast to photoemissive detectors) but their use at wavelengths beyond about 2 ит
generally requires cooling to minimize the thermal generation of electron-hole pairs.
Response time. The response time of a photoconductive detector is constrained by
the transit-time and RC’ time-constant considerations discussed in Sec. 19.1B. The
carrier-transport response time is approximately equal to the recombination time т,
so that the carrier-transport bandwidth В is inversely proportional to т. Since the
gain G is directly proportional to т in accordance with (19.2-3), increasing т serves
to increase the gain, which is desirable, but concomitantly decreases the bandwidth,
which is undesirable. The gain—bandwidth product GB thus turns out to be roughly
independent of т; values of G'B can extend up to = 10”.
B. Extrinsic Photoconductors
Photoconductivity can be achieved at wavelengths that extend to the far infrared by
making use of doped semiconductors. Mobile charge carriers can be generated via
photon absorption by dopants with energy levels lying within the forbidden gap. The
process can occur in one of two ways: (1) an incident photon interacts with a bound
electron at a donor site, frees it to the conduction band, and leaves behind a bound
hole; or (2) an incident photon interacts with a bound hole at an acceptor site, frees
it to the valence band, and leaves behind a bound electron, as illustrated in Fig. 17.2-
1(6). Donor and acceptor levels in the bandgap of doped semiconductors can have
very low activation energies Ед, and therefore quite extended long-wavelength limits
ЛА = he, /E,. These detectors must be cooled to avoid thermal excitation; liquid He
at 4° К is often used. Representative values of Ед and Ад are provided in Table 19.2-1
for a number of extrinsic photoconductive detectors.
Table 19.2-1 Selected extrinsic semiconductor materials with their activation
energies Ед and long-wavelength limits Ад = hc,/Ea.
Semiconductor:Dopant Ед (eV) ЛА (um)
Ge:Hg 0.088 14
Ge:Cu 0.041 30
Ge:Zn 0.033 38
Ge:Ga 0.010 115
$1:В 0.044 23

886 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

The relative responsivities of several extrinsic photoconductive detectors are illus-
trated in Fig. 19.2-2. For all of these materials, the responsivity increases approxi-
mately linearly with Ло, in accordance with (19.1-8), peaks slightly below the long-
wavelength limit Ад, and falls off rapidly beyond it. The quantum efficiencies of these
detectors can be substantial (e.g., 7 = 0.5 for Ge:Cu), although the gain can be low
under usual operating conditions (e.g., G = 0.03 for Ge:Hg).

> Ge:Hg Ge:Cu Ge:Zn Ge:Ga Ge:Ga (stressed)

Я

я

2

2

as}

Pe

2 4 10 20 40 100 200
Wavelength Л, (jum)

Figure 19.2-2 Relative responsivity vs. wavelength Ло (4m) for a number of different doped-Ge
extrinsic materials used as infrared photoconductive detectors.
C. Heterostructure Photoconductors
Properly configured heterostructures can serve as useful photoconductive detectors. An
example is the quantum-well infrared photodetector (QWIP). An incident infrared
photon releases the electron occupying a bound energy level in a quantum-well to the
continuum, thereby creating a mobile charge carrier that increases the conductivity of
the material (Fig. 19.2-3). In an alternate configuration, the quantum wells are situated
between superlattice barriers and the electrons are swept out via a miniband transport
channel lying below the continuum [Fig. 17.2-10(d)]. QWIPs typically have sharp
spectral responses dictated by the narrowness of the quantized states and operate at
cryogenic temperatures.

The quantum-dot infrared photodetector (QDIP), a variation on this theme, can
also be used for multiwavelength infrared detection via intersubband transitions. The
dot-in-well QDIP (DWELL-QDIP) offers a further improvement in performance by
imposing constraints on the locations of the quantum dots.

Figure 19.2-3 Generation of mobile charge carriers by

absorption of photons in a QWIP. The detector illustrated

comprises AlGaAs barriers and n-type GaAs quantum wells

AlGaAs On that provide the electrons occupying the energy levels. The
р On device is configured in such a way that there is a single
р] On. energy level in each well, whose parameters are adjusted

р to provide sensitivity at a particular central wavelength.

Though they require cooling, QWIPs fabricated from Ш-

GaAs V compound semiconductors offer high speeds and high re-
sponsivities from mid- to far-infrared wavelengths (A, = 3—

20 ила). They are often used in focal-plane arrays (Sec. 19.5).

19.3 PHOTODIODES 887
19.3 PHOTODIODES
A. The р-п Photodiode
As with photoconductors, photodiode detectors rely on photogenerated charge car-
riers for their operation. A photodiode is a p—n junction (Sec. 17.1E) whose reverse
current increases when it absorbs photons. Though p—n and p—7—n (PIN) photodiodes
are generally faster than photoconductors, they do not exhibit gain.
Consider a reverse-biased p—n junction under illumination, as depicted in Fig. 19.3-
1. Photons are absorbed everywhere with absorption coefficient ~. Whenever a photon
is absorbed, an electron-hole pair is generated. But only at locations where an electric
field is present can the charge carriers be transported in a particular direction. Since a
p-n junction can support an electric field only in the depletion layer, this is the region
in which it is most desirable to generate photocarriers.
2 3
Q i
© © р
о (+)
n
=
Electric field Е
Figure 19.3-1 Photons illuminating an idealized reverse-biased p—n photodiode detector. The drift
and diffusion regions are indicated by 1 and 2, respectively. Carriers generated beyond the diffusion
region, in 3, fail to contribute to the photocurrent. Illumination can be directed parallel to the junction
layer (edge illumination), as illustrated, or at normal incidence to the junction layer.
There are, nevertheless, three possible locations where electron-hole pairs can be
generated:
= Electrons and holes generated in the depletion layer (region 1) quickly drift
in opposite directions under the influence of the strong electric field. Since the
electric field always points in the пр direction, electrons move to the п side
and holes to the p side. As a result, the photocurrent created in the external circuit
is always in the reverse direction (from the n to the p region). Each carrier pair
generates in the external circuit an electric current pulse of area e (G = 1) since
recombination does not take place in the depleted region.
= Electrons and holes generated well away from the depletion layer (region 3)
cannot be transported because of the absence of an electric field. They wander
randomly until they are annihilated by recombination. They do not contribute a
signal to the external electric current.
= Electron—-hole pairs generated outside the depletion layer, but in its vicinity (re-
gion 2), have a chance of entering the depletion layer by random diffusion. An
electron coming from the p side is quickly transported across the junction and
therefore contributes a charge e to the external circuit. A hole coming from the п
side has a similar effect.
Photodiodes have been fabricated from many of the semiconductor materials listed
in Table 17.1-2, as well as from binary, ternary, and quaternary compound semicon-
ductors such as InGaAs, InGaAsP, SiC, and GeSn. Devices can be constructed so that

888 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

light is directed parallel to the junction layer via edge illumination, as illustrated in
Fig. 19.3-1, or at normal incidence to the junction layer.

Response Time

The transit time of carriers drifting across the depletion layer (иш/м. for electrons
and ид/м» for holes) and the RC time constant both play a role in the response time
of photodiode detectors, as discussed in Sec. 19.1B. The resulting circuit current is
displayed in Fig. 19.1-6(b) for an electron-hole pair generated at a given position т,
and in Fig. 19.1-7 for uniform electron-hole pair generation.

In photodiodes there is an additional contribution to the response time arising from
diffusion, which is a relatively slow process in comparison with drift. Carriers gener-
ated outside the depletion layer, but sufficiently close to it, take some time to diffuse
into it, where they contribute to the current. The maximum times allowed for this
process are the carrier lifetimes (7, for electrons in the р region and т», for holes in the
n region). The deleterious effects of diffusion time can be diminished by making use of
p-i—n photodiodes, as will be seen in Sec. 19.3B. Nevertheless, photodiodes are gen-
erally faster than photoconductors because of the large velocity of the photogenerated
carriers imparted by the strong field in the depletion region. Furthermore, photodiodes
are not affected by many of the trapping effects associated with photoconductors.
Modes of Operation
From the perspective of an electronic device, the photodiode 7—V relation is given by

Lo, eV .
t=, (7) — 1 — tp, (19.3-1)
as illustrated in Fig. 19.3-2. This is the usual 7—V relation for a p—n junction provided
in (17.1-32) with an added term for the photocurrent —2, that is proportional to the
photon flux Ф.
;
о+ +
Ф ;
| mweY oy .
i Ф=0 | У, у
_ P
°- ®>0
Figure 19.3-2 Generic photodiode and its i-V relation.
There are three classical modes in which photodiodes are operated: open-circuit (pho-
tovoltaic), short-circuit, and reverse-biased (photoconductive).

Open-circuit mode. In the open-circuit mode (Fig. 19.3-3), the light generates
electron-hole pairs in the depletion region. The additional electrons freed on the n side
of the layer recombine with holes on the p side, and vice versa. The net result is an
increase in the electric field, which produces a photovoltage У, across the device that
increases with increasing photon flux ®. Since it is operating as an open-circuit device
(1 = 0), the responsivity of a photodiode operating in photovoltaic mode is measured
in V/W rather than A/W. This is the mode of operation used in solar cells.

Short-circuit mode. The short-circuit (V = 0) mode is illustrated in Fig. 19.3-4.
The short-circuit current is simply the photocurrent —%,.

19.3 PHOTODIODES 889
+
® i ® ; i
WW У, 7 (ь\
0 0
if Ф=0 Vio У if $Ф=0 | У
Ф Ф tel
-iyy
®, $,
Figure 19.3-3 Photovoltaic (open-circuit) Figure 19.3-4 Short-circuit operation of a
operation of a photodiode. photodiode.
Ф i Е, i
wi | $
у, Ww \i Ve
—Ув —Ув
| у к у
1 N
»| a ~
р aN
| N
—Ув [Ку
(а) (b)
Figure 19.3-5 Reverse-biased operation of a photodiode: (a) without a load resistor and (5) with
a load resistor. The operating point lies on the dashed line.

Reverse-biased mode. Lastly, a photodiode may be operated in its reverse-biased
ог “photoconductive” mode, as portrayed in Fig. 19.3-5(а). If a series load resistor
is inserted in the circuit, the operating conditions are those shown in Fig. 19.3-5(6).
Photodiodes are usually operated in a strongly reverse-biased mode for the following
reasons:

= A strong reverse bias creates a strong electric field in the junction region that

increases the drift velocity of the carriers, thereby reducing transit time.

= A strong reverse bias increases the width of the depletion layer, which reduces the

junction capacitance and improves the response time.

= The increased width of the depletion layer offers a larger photosensitive area,

facilitating the collection of more light.
В. The p—i—n Photodiode
As a detector, the p—7—n (PIN) photodiode has a number of advantages over the p—n
photodiode. A p—i—n diode is a p—n junction with an intrinsic (often unintentionally
or lightly doped) layer sandwiched between the p and n layers (Sec. 17.1E). It can
be operated under the various bias conditions considered for the p—n photodiode in
the preceding section. The energy-band diagram, charge distribution, and electric-

890 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
field distribution for a reverse-biased p—i—n diode are illustrated in Fig. 19.3-6. This
structure serves to extend the width of the region supporting an electric field, in effect
widening the depletion layer.
Aan A
OnE кет
Electron Е р
energy р Е о
Е,
x
Fixed-charge | + [ |
density _ | x
Electric a и x
field \ |
Figure 19.3-6 The рп photodiode structure, energy-band diagram, charge distribution, and
electric-field distribution. The incident light can be directed parallel to the junction layer (so-called
edge illumination), i.e., vertically in the figure. Alternatively, the light can be directed at normal
incidence to the junction layer, i.e., horizontally in the plane of the figure.
Photodiodes with a p—i—n structure offer the following advantages:
= Increasing the width of the depletion layer of the device (where the generated
carriers can be transported by drift) increases the area available for capturing light.

= Increasing the width of the depletion layer reduces the junction capacitance and
thereby the RC time constant. On the other hand, the transit time increases with
increasing width of the depletion layer.

= Reducing the ratio between the diffusion length and the drift length of the device

results in a greater proportion of the generated carriers undergoing the faster drift
process.

Normal vs. edge illumination. For normally illuminated photodiodes, the car-
rier flow is parallel to that of the photons, which leads to a tradeoff between respon-
sivity and bandwidth since attaining high responsivity requires a sufficiently thick
absorption layer (considering Ing.53Gag,47As with a = 104 cm7! as an example,
a thickness of = 2 jum is required to absorb 88% of the incident light). Yet, the
thicker the absorption region the greater the transit time, and hence the narrower the
bandwidth. For edge-illuminated photodiodes, on the other hand, light is coupled
into the device in a direction perpendicular to the carrier transport, which permits
the absorption layer to be much thinner than that for normal-incidence photodiodes.
Thus, a salutary feature of the edge-illumination configuration is that it decouples the
absorption of light (responsivity) and the carrier transit time (bandwidth).

Evanescent coupling. A common implementation for edge-illuminated photodi-
odes is to abut an optical fiber or a passive waveguide with the intrinsic region. In
that case, the quantum efficiency (19.1-3) must accommodate the coupling loss and
the appropriate optical power confinement factor Г. Evanescently coupled wave-
guide photodiodes were developed to mitigate such losses. They typically consist
of a photodiode located atop a passive waveguide and are well-suited to monolithic
integration in photonic integrated circuits. Evanescent coupling also mitigates any
lattice mismatch between the photodiode and waveguide materials and typically offers
large bandwidths. Performance can be further enhanced by implementing a traveling-
wave configuration.

19.3 PHOTODIODES 891

Responsivity of Si PIN photodiodes. The responsivity of two commercially
available Si p—i—n photodiodes is compared with that of an ideal device (7 = 1)
in Fig. 19.3-7. The responsivity maximum occurs at a wavelength shorter than the
bandgap wavelength. This is because Si is an indirect-bandgap material. The photon-
absorption transitions therefore typically take place from valence-band to conduction-
band states that lie well above the conduction-band edge, as depicted in Fig. 17.2-6.

1.0
< Ideal :
2 об photodiode Figure 19.3-7 Responsivity (A/W) уз.
= 522, ! wavelength (ила) for an ideal Si photodiode
5. 04 27 ` ; (7 = 1) and for two commercially available Si
2 й \: p-i—n photodiodes. The quantum efficiency of

02 OL а a carefully constructed, antireflection-coated

; Photodiodes : silicon device can approach unity.
0 05 10g
Wavelength Л, (jum)

Enhancing Si-photodiode performance with photon-trapping microstructures.
Silicon p-7—n photodiodes that operate at visible wavelengths enjoy the benefit of a
large absorption coefficient a. However, as the wavelength moves toward the near
infrared, the absorption coefficient decreases, thereby necessitating the use of a thicker
absorption region to maintain the external quantum efficiency. This in turn results in
increased transit time and reduced device bandwidth. This undesirable effect can be
mitigated by permeating the intrinsic absorption region with micro- and nanostructured
holes that serve to efficiently trap the light, which substantially increases the effective
absorption coefficient.’ This in turn allows for devices with thinner absorption regions
and larger bandwidths.

C. Heterostructure Photodiodes

Heterostructure photodiodes, comprising at least two semiconductor materials with
different bandgaps, provide flexibility that can offer advantages over homojunctions
fabricated from a single material. A heterojunction that incorporates a large-bandgap
material (E, > hv), for example, can make use of its transparency to minimize optical
absorption outside the depletion region and hence to reduce surface recombination and
maximize ¢ in (19.1-3); the large-bandgap material is then said to be a window layer.

Two or more materials can also be fashioned into a structure that makes use of
the best features of each. A Ge-on-Si waveguide structure, for example, combines the
superior guiding properties of Si with the strong near-infrared absorption properties
of Ge (Example 19.3-2). Several material systems are of particular interest (see, e.g.,
Figs. 17.1-7, 17.1-8, and 18.1-16):

= Al,.Ga;_,As/GaAs (AlGaAs lattice matched to a GaAs substrate) is useful in the

wavelength range 0.7 to 0.87 um.

1 See, e.g., У. Gao, H. Cansizoglu, К. G. Polat, 5. Ghandiparsi, A. Kaya, H. Н. Mamtaz, А. S. Mayet, У. Wang,
X. Zhang, T. Yamada, Е. P. Devine, A. Е. Elrefaie, S.-Y. Wang, and М. $. Islam, Photon-Trapping Microstructures
Enable High-Speed High-Efficiency Silicon Photodiodes, Nature Photonics, vol. 11, pp. 301-308, 2017.

892 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
= In,,Ga,_,As/InP is a direct-bandgap material that can be lattice matched to an
InP substrate. The bandgap wavelength of this material is compositionally tunable
over the near infrared and a portion of the mid infrared: 0.873 wm (GaAs) < A, <
3.44 ит (InAs) (Fig. 18.1-16). This range of wavelengths includes the 1.3-—1.6-
ит telecommunications band. A typical InGaAs p-i—n photodetector operating
at 1550 nm has a quantum efficiency 7 = 0.80, a responsivity К = 0.95 A/W, and
a bandwidth = 10 GHz.
= Ge/Geg.935Ng.97/Ge CMOS-compatible double-heterostructures grown directly
on Si operate at wavelengths as long as 2.2 ит. In the current state of the
technology, a typical p-2—n photodiode operating at room temperature at 1550 nm
exhibits a responsivity К = 0.3 A/W at normal incidence under a reverse-bias
voltage of 0.1 V.
= Hg,,Cd;_,Te/CdTe finds extensive use in the mid infrared. This II-VI ternary
semiconductor can be lattice matched to CdTe at nearly all compositions since
CdTe and HgTe have nearly the same lattice parameter (Fig. 17.1-8). HgCdTe is
compositionally tunable with a bandgap energy that extends from about 0.85 to
16 ит. Applications include night vision, thermal imaging, and long-wavelength
optical communications.
= Quaternaries, such as Inj_,Ga;As_,P,/InP, Inj_,Ga,As,_,Sb,/GaSb, and
Al;_,Ga,As}_ySb,/GaSb, which are useful over wavelengths that extend from
0.92 to 5 yum, are of interest because the fourth element provides an additional
degree of freedom that allows lattice matching to be achieved for different
compositionally determined values of E,.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 19.3-1. Ш-У Multi-Junction Photovoltaic Solar Се!.  Multi-junction solar
cells are heterostructures comprising multiple thin semiconductors films of different bandgap en-
ergies stacked one atop the other. If the light enters from the top, the values of E, successively
decrease from the top to the bottom layer, so that each layer acts as a window layer for the one
below it. This allows absorption to be optimized for the various spectral slices of the solar ra-
diation that reaches earth. A heterostructure photodiode containing five layers of Ш-У materials
(InGaP/GaAs/InGaAsNSb/GaSb/InGaAsSb) operating in the photovoltaic mode harvests > 99%
of the available solar power and achieves a quantum efficiency 7 > 41%.* The two smallest-bandgap
layers at the bottom of the stack, GaSb and InGaAsSb, absorb light in the wavelength region between
1.7 and 2.5 um in the infrared (Fig. 18.1-16).
EXAMPLE 19.3-2. Ge-on-Si Waveguide Photodiode. In the 1.3-1.6-ит telecommuni-
cations band, silicon is transparent (A, = 1.11 sm; see Table 17.1-2) and therefore not photo-
sensitive. Efficient and high-speed silicon-photonics-based photodetectors have traditionally been
fabricated via hybrid integration of photosensitive Ш-У materials, such as InGaAs оп Si, but an
alternative is to make use of CMOS-compatible Ge, which is sensitive over this range of wavelengths.
However, accommodating the substantial lattice mismatch between Ge and Si (= 4.2%) dictates using
configurations in which Ge and Si are evanescently or butt coupled. In one particular design that relies
on edge illumination, light emerging from a Si waveguide is butt-coupled to the intrinsic region of a
lateral p-i—n Ge-on-Si photodiode integrated at the end of the Si waveguide.* Operating at 1550 nm,
this photodiode offers a responsivity of 1 A/W and a bandwidth > 50 GHz. It has performance
comparable with that obtained using hybrid integration of InGaAs on Si and it can also be operated
in photovoltaic mode.
ПОНИ
1 See М. Р. Lumb, S. Mack, К. J. Schmieder, М. Gonzalez, M. Е. Bennett, О. Scheiman, М. Meitl, В. Fisher,
S. Burroughs, K.-T. Lee, J. A. Rogers, and R. J. Walters, GaSb-Based Solar Cells for Full Solar Spectrum Energy
Harvesting, Advanced Energy Materials, vol. 7, 1700345, 2017.
* See L. Vivien, A. Polzer, D. Marris-Morini, J. Osmond, J. M. Hartmann, P. Crozat, E. Cassan, C. Kopp,
H. Zimmermann, and J. M. Fédéli, Zero-Bias 40 Gb/s Germanium Waveguide Photodetector on Silicon, Optics
Express, vol. 20, pp. 1096-1101, 2012.

193 PHOTODIODES 893
Schottky-Barrier Photodiodes
Metal-semiconductor photodiodes (also called Schottky-barrier photodiodes) are
formed from metal-semiconductor heterojunctions. A thin semitransparent metallic
film is used in place of the p-type (or n-type) layer in the p—n junction photodiode.
The thin film is sometimes fabricated from а metal—-semiconductor alloy that behaves
like a metal. The Schottky-barrier structure and its energy-band diagram are shown
schematically in Fig. 19.3-8 for metal deposited on a lightly doped n-type semicon-
ductor.

о FY
w-x
Semiconductor 5 a
Metal 5
Е,
Metal Semiconductor
(a) (b)
Figure 19.3-8 (a) Structure and (6) energy-band diagram of a Schottky-barrier photodiode formed
by depositing a metal on an n-type semiconductor. At equilibrium, the Fermi levels in the two regions
align. These photodetectors are responsive to photon energies greater than the Schottky barrier height,
hv > W-— x. Schottky-barrier photodiodes can be fabricated from many materials, such as Au on
n-type Si (which operates in the visible) and platinum silicide (PtSi) on p-type Si (which operates
over a range of wavelengths that stretches from the ultraviolet to the infrared).
On contact, electrons flow from the semiconductor to the metal, bringing the Fermi
levels of the two materials into alignment. This results in a region depleted of free
electrons just inside the semiconductor interface. The accompanying fixed positive
charges in the semiconductor cause its valence and conduction bands to bend upward
at the interface. At equilibrium, the discontinuity in allowed energy states of the two
materials gives rise to the Schottky barrier, which blocks the flow of electrons from
the metal back to the semiconductor and is responsible for the rectifying nature of the
device. The absorption of a photon results in current flow.
Schottky-barrier photodiodes are particularly useful in a number of circumstances:
= Not all semiconductors can be prepared in both p-type and n-type forms;
Schottky-barrier devices can be used in these material systems.

= Semiconductors used for the detection of visible and ultraviolet light with a pho-
ton energy well above the bandgap energy have a large absorption coefficient.
This gives rise to substantial surface recombination and a reduction of quantum
efficiency. The depletion layer of the metal-semiconductor junction is present im-
mediately at the surface, in contrast, thereby eliminating surface recombination.

= The response speed of p—n and p—i—n junction photodiodes is in part limited by
the slow diffusion current associated with photocarriers generated close to, but
outside of, the depletion layer. One way of decreasing this unwanted absorption
is to decrease the thickness of one of the junction layers, but this should be imple-
mented without substantially increasing the series resistance of the device, which
increases the RC' time constant. The Schottky-barrier structure achieves this be-
cause of the low resistance of the metal. Furthermore, Schottky-barrier structures
are majority-carrier devices and therefore have inherently fast responses and large
operating bandwidths. Response times of ps, corresponding to bandwidths of
100 GHz, are readily available.

894 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
Representative responsivity curves for several p—i—n and Schottky-barrier photodi-
odes are displayed in Fig. 19.3-9.
1.0 InGaAs/InP

Е Si

< \/;

ыы

5 )

z л

= Ag-ZnSI ‘ /|

0.1
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Wavelength Л, (рт)
Figure 19.3-9 Responsivity К (A/W) versus wavelength Ло (wm) for a number of p—i—n (solid)
and Schottky-barrier (dashed) photodiodes. For ternary and quaternary devices, the wavelength of
maximal response depends on composition. Response times in the tens of ps, corresponding to
bandwidths = 50 GHz, are generally available.
ини |
EXAMPLE 19.3-3. Graphene—Si Schottky-Barrier Photodiode. — Graphene is а 2D crys-
tal comprising a one-atom-thick layer of graphite whose atoms are arranged in a hexagonal honey-
comb lattice (Sec. 17.1B). By virtue of graphene’s high conductivity, low reflectance, high carrier
mobility, and the broad spectrum over which it interacts with radiation, the junction between graphene
and n-type silicon can serve as a high-speed, broadband Schottky-barrier photodiode. It is remarkable
that a junction formed by a 2D/zero-bandgap material and a 3D/finite-bandgap material yields a
practical operating device. Calculations show that the absorbance of graphene is A == пе? /hic © 2.3%
for photon energies below 3 eV. Since the reflectance of a single graphene layer is minuscule,
R = 1.3 x 1074, the intensity transmittance is T = 1 — А = 97.7% (at normal incidence). The
graphene thus acts as a nonreflecting, transparent electrode that serves to collect carriers while the
optical absorption associated with the detection process takes place in the silicon. Schottky-barrier
photodiodes have been fabricated by depositing graphene on lightly doped n-type silicon using CVD
in a CMOS-compatible process.’ The devices are sensitive over the visible and near-infrared spectral
regions, exhibiting a cutoff at the bandgap wavelength of Si, А, = 1.1 ит. Illuminated at normal
incidence, the responsivity of a typical device closely resembles the Si responsivity curve portrayed
in Fig. 19.3-9. Using (19.1-5), together with the observed responsivity of К = 0.3 A/W at 0.6 wm
on the graphene-Si curve leads to a quantum efficiency 7 = 0.6. Devices such as these can also be
configured to provide internal gain by using electrodes that direct the current flow laterally, along
the width of the device rather than through its thickness, thereby co-opting the enormous contrast
between the fast transit time of graphene, т», and the slow recombination time in the graphene-silicon
system, т. In accordance with (19.2-3), this configuration leads to a gain given by G = т/ть. The
observed value of gain in these devices is G == 3 x 10*, corresponding to a responsivity В = 104 in
accordance with (19.1-8). It is noteworthy that the Fermi level of graphene may be tuned by doping,
or by the application of a bias voltage, which serves to modify the barrier height of the Schottky
junction and thus the current—voltage relationship of the device. Other 2D materials have also been
juxtaposed with various semiconductor structures to construct photodiodes that operate in both biased
and photovoltaic modes.
ини |
* See Е. Liu and $. Kar, Quantum Carrier Reinvestment-Induced Ultrahigh and Broadband Photocurrent

Responses in Graphene-Silicon Junctions, ACS Nano, vol. 8, pp. 10270-10279, 2014.

19.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 895
19.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES
An avalanche photodiode (APD) operates by converting each detected photon into a
cascade of moving carrier pairs. Weak light is then able to elicit a current that is suffi-
ciently large so that it can be readily detected by the electronics following the device.
APDs are configured as strongly reverse-biased photodiodes that have large electric
fields in the junction region, enabling charge carriers to acquire sufficient energy so
they can excite new carriers via impact ionization. However, the multiplication process
requires time to play out and introduces gain noise, which limits system bandwidth and
performance. Avalanche photodiodes find extensive use in optical fiber communication
receivers (Sec. 25.1D) and are used in applications involving imaging, scanning, and
range finding.
A. Conventional Avalanche Photodiodes
The history of a typical electron—hole pair in the depletion region of a conventional
avalanche photodiode (CAPD) is depicted in Fig. 19.4-1. A photon is absorbed at
point 1, creating an electron-hole pair (an electron in the conduction band and a hole
in the valence band). The electron accelerates under the influence of the strong electric
field, thereby increasing its energy with respect to the bottom of the conduction band.
The acceleration process is constantly interrupted by random collisions with the lattice
in which the electron loses some of its acquired energy. These competing processes
cause the electron to reach an average saturation velocity. Should the electron be
lucky and acquire an energy larger than Е, at any time during the process, it has an
opportunity to generate a second electron-hole pair by impact ionization (say at point
2). The two electrons then accelerate under the effect of the field, and each of them
may be the source for a further impact ionization. The holes generated at points 1 and
2 also accelerate, moving toward the left. Each of these also has a chance of creating
an impact ionization should they acquire sufficient energy, thereby generating a hole-
initiated electron-hole pair (e.g., at point 3).
В
в © х , ,
5 Figure 19.4-1 Schematic represen-
5 м. tation of the multiplication process in
8 6 a conventional homojunction avalanche
8 © © photodiode (CAPD).
jaa)
E.
\ Е п
Е,
x

lonization Coefficients and lonization Ratio
Ionization coefficients. The abilities of electrons and holes to impact ionize are
characterized by the ionization coefficients a, and a), respectively. These quantities
represent ionization probabilities per unit length (cm~'); the inverse coefficients 1/a,

896 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
and 1/a;, represent average distances between consecutive ionizations for electrons
and holes, respectively. The ionization coefficients increase with electric-field strength
in the depletion layer (since it provides the acceleration) and decrease with increasing
device temperature (since the increased frequency of collisions diminishes the opportu-
nity of a carrier gaining sufficient energy to cause an ionization). The simplified theory
presented in this section assumes that a, and ap are constants. For purposes of noise
reduction, however, it can be advantageous to design devices in which the ionization
coefficients depend on carrier history and position in particular ways, as discussed in
Sec. 19.4B.
Ionization ratio. An important parameter for characterizing the performance of an
APD is the ionization ratio, which is defined as the ratio of the ionization coefficients,
k=ap/Qe. (19.4-1)
When holes do not ionize appreciably (i.e., when a, < ме so that К < 1), most of the
ionization is achieved by electrons. The avalanching process then proceeds principally
from left to right in Fig. 19.4-1 (1.е., from the р side to the n side of the device),
and terminates when all of the electrons arrive at the n side of the depletion layer.
If electrons and holes both ionize appreciably (К = 1), those holes that move to
the left create electrons that move to the right, which in turn generate further holes
moving to the left, possibly leading to an unending circulation. Though this feedback
process increases the gain of the device (the total generated charge in the circuit per
photocarrier pair, а/е), it is nevertheless undesirable for several reasons:

= It is time consuming and therefore reduces the device bandwidth.

= It is random and therefore increases the device noise.

= It can be unstable, thereby causing avalanche breakdown.

It is therefore desirable to fabricate APDs from single-carrier-multiplication ma-
terials, 1.е., from materials that permit only one type of carrier (either electrons or
holes) to impact ionize. For example, if electrons have the higher ionization coefficient,
optimal behavior is attained by injecting the electron of a photocarrier pair at the p-
type edge of the depletion layer, and by making use of a material whose value of k
is as small as possible. If the material is such that holes have the higher ionization
coefficient, the hole of a photocarrier pair should be injected at the n-type edge of the
depletion layer and k should be as large as possible. Hence, the ideal case of single-
carrier multiplication is achieved when k = 0 or co.

Gain and Responsivity
Single-carrier-injection single-carrier-multiplication (SCISCM) devices. As a
prelude to determining the gain of an APD in which both kinds of carriers can give
rise to ionizations, we first consider the simpler problem of single-carrier (electron)
multiplication (a, = 0, К = 0) with single-carrier (electron) injection. Let J.(x) be the
electric current density carried by electrons at location 2, as illustrated in Fig. 19.4-2.
Jw)
и
Uo Figure 19.4-2 Exponential growth of the
Ig) „7 electric current density in a single-carrier-
1) _ Ler injection single-carrier-multiplication APD.
0 x Ww

19.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 897
Within a distance dx, on average, the current is incremented by
dJ.(%) = aeJe(x) ах, (19.4-2)
from which we obtain the differential equation
dJ
i =a, (т), (19.4-3)
whose solution is the exponential function J.(x) = J-(0)exp(a-x). The gain G =
J.(w)/J-(0) is therefore
G = ехр(аем)). (19.4-4)
The electric current density increases exponentially with the product of the ionization
coefficient a, and the multiplication layer width w. The result is analogous to that for
gain in a laser amplifier [see (15.1-7)].
Single-carrier-injection double-carrier-multiplication (SCIDCM) devices. Solu-
tion of the double-carrier multiplication problem requires knowledge of both the elec-
tron current density J.(a) and the hole current density J;,(a). We assume that only
electrons are injected into the multiplication region (single-carrier injection). Since
hole ionizations also produce electrons, however, the growth of J.(a) is governed by
the differential equation
dJ,
i = ae Ле (1) + аъ Л» (т). (19.4-5)
As а result of charge neutrality, dJ./dx = —dJ},/dx, and the зат Л (2) + Jn(x)
must remain constant for all x under steady-state conditions. This is clear from the
illustration provided in Fig. 19.4-3; the total number of charge carriers crossing any
plane is the same regardless of the position т.
| |
Injected |
electron 1 |
© © |
| 2 |
| © © © |
| 3 |e
| - 7 |
4
| |
Figure 19.4-3 Constancy of the sum of the electron and hole current densities across a plane at
any value of x. By way of illustration, a single injected electron gives rise to four impact ionizations,
with four electrons plus four holes crossing every plane.
Since it is assumed that no holes are injected at x = w, we have „Л,(и/) = 0 so that
Je(x) + Jn(xz) = Je(w), (19.4-6)
as displayed in Fig. 19.4-4.

898 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
Jew)
Figure 19.4-4 Electron and hole current
densities in a double-carrier-multiplication
J,(0) APD with electron injection.
0 w x
The hole current density J),(x) can therefore be eliminated in (19.4-5) to obtain
А.Л
=. = (ae — ав) Ле (2) + ande(w). (19.4-7)
This first-order differential equation is readily solved for the gain G = J.(w)/J.(0).
For ae # Mp, the result is G = (ae — an) / {Ae exp|—(Ae — an) w] — ap}, from which
we obtain
1-k
G = ——_.. (19.4-8)
exp[—(1 — k)aew] — К APD Gain
The single-carrier multiplication result for the gain (19.4-4), with its simple expo-
nential growth, is recovered when К = 0. When К = со so that only holes multiply, the
gain remains unity since only electrons are injected and electrons do not multiply. For
k = 1, (19.4-8) is indeterminate and the gain must be obtained directly from (19.4-7);
the result is then G = 1/(1 — aw). An instability is reached when a,w = 1. The
dependence of the gain on a, w for several values of the ionization ratio К is illustrated
in Fig. 19.4-5.
94  к=| |К=05 — К=0
Figure 19.4-5 Growth of the gain G with
multiplication-layer width w for several values
of the ionization ratio К in а single-carrier-
injection double-carrier-multiplication (SCIDCM)
; APD with pure electron injection.
0 1 2 ам
The responsivity К of the SCIDCM APD is obtained by using (19.4-8) in conjunc-
tion with the general relation (19.1-8).
Device Structures
As with photodiodes, APDs should be configured with a geometry designed to max-
imize photon absorption (e.g., by emulating a p—7—n structure) and to minimize dark
current. Concomitantly, the multiplication region should be designed with a sufficiently
strong field to foster single-carrier impact ionization with minimal multiplication noise,
and thin enough to minimize the possibility of uncontrolled localized avalanches asso-
ciated with instabilities and microplasmas.

19.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 899
SAM APDs. These conflicting requirements call for an APD design in which the
absorption and multiplication regions are spatially separated. Structures of this kind
are known as separate absorption and multiplication (SAM) APDs.

Reach-through APDs. The operation of a ЗАМ APD is most readily understood
by considering a device fabricated from a material such as Si, for which К = 0
(Example 19.6-3). In the device portrayed in Fig. 19.4-6, known as a reach-through
APD, photons are absorbed in an extended intrinsic (or lightly doped) т region. The
photoelectrons drift across this region under the influence of a moderate electric field
and then enter a thin p—n* junction where they experience an electric field sufficient to
cause avalanching. The reverse-bias voltage applied across the device is large enough
for the depletion region to reach through the р and т regions into the p* contact layer.

РЯ
м
Figure 19.4-6 Reach-through рт-л-р-п*
os APD structure. The 7 region is intrinsic or
pad - very lightly doped p-type material. The p* and
53 * nt regions are heavily doped. Avalanching
| occurs in the thin p—n* junction region where
the electric field is strong.

SACM APDs. _ A variation on the SAM theme is the separate absorption, charge,
and multiplication (SACM) APD, a heterostructure device that incorporates a charge
layer in addition to the separate absorption and multiplication layers. The charge layer
is designed to keep the electric field in the absorption region small (so that dark current
arising from tunneling in this narrow-bandgap layer is minimized), while providing
a large field in the wide-bandgap multiplication region (to facilitate impact ioniza-
tions). Use of a wide-bandgap multiplication layer minimizes tunneling and thermal
effects, thereby minimizing the dark current generated in this region. The relative field
strengths in the two regions are governed by the doping profile, much as with the
reach-through structure shown in Fig. 19.4-6. Compositionally graded layers are often
incorporated to avoid carriers from being trapped at the interfaces between layers.
Response Time
Avalanche buildup time. Aside from the usual transit, diffusion, and RC time con-
stants that govern the response time of photodiodes, APDs are subject to an additional
time constant known as the avalanche buildup time. It is the time required for the
impact-ionization process to unfold and settle, and it places a limit on the speeds at
which APD-based systems can operate. Systems operating at bit rates beyond those
limits must make use of p—i—n photodiodes.

The response time of a separate absorption and multiplication (SAM) APD is illus-
trated in Fig. 19.4-7 by displaying the history of a photoelectron generated at the edge
of the absorption region (point 1). The APD is assumed to operate via single-carrier-
injection double-carrier-multiplication (SCIDCM). The electron drifts with a saturation
velocity ve, reaching the multiplication region (point 2) after a transit time wy/Ve.
Within the multiplication region the electron also travels with velocity v.. Through
impact ionization it creates electron-hole pairs, say at points 3 and 4, generating two
additional electron-hole pairs. The holes travel in the opposite direction with their sat-
uration velocity мл. The holes can also cause impact ionizations, resulting in electron—
hole pairs as shown, for example, at points 5 and 6. These carriers can themselves cause

900 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
impact ionizations, sustaining the feedback loop. The process terminates when the last
hole (at point 7) leaves the multiplication region and crosses the absorption region to
arrive at point 8.
i
region region
Hole Electron
| Wa | Win current i,(t) й current i,(f)
Wy i 1 x TTT
SS 4 4
<< 5 5
6 6
у он
т ev,
Wa
Vi
| — |=
АА 8 8 ем,
Wat Wy,
1 1 t
(a) (b)
Figure 19.4-7 (a) Tracing the course of the avalanche buildup time in a SAM APD with the
help of a position—-time graph. The device is assumed to operate via single-carrier-injection and
double-carrier multiplication. The blue lines represent electrons, and the green lines represent holes.
Electrons move to the right with velocity у. and holes move to the left with velocity м». Electron—
hole pairs are produced in the multiplication region. The carriers cease moving when they reach the
edge of the material. (5) Hole current i;,(t) and electron current (+) induced in the circuit. Each
catrier pair induces a charge e in the circuit. The total induced charge 4, which is the area under the
ie(t) + in(t) vs. Е curve, is Ge. This figure is a generalization of Fig. 19.1-6, which applies for a
single electron-hole pair.

The total time 7 required for the entire process (between points | and 8) to unfold is
the sum of the transit times (roughly from 1 to 2 and from 7 to 8) and the multiplication
time denoted 7,,,,

Wa Wa
TX — + — т». (19.4-9)
Ve У
Because of the randomness of the multiplication process, the multiplication time ту, is
random. In the special case when К = 0 (no hole multiplication) the maximum value
of ти, is readily seen from Fig. 19.4-7 to be
и ии
Tm 4+. (19.4-10)
Ve У,
For large gain G, and for electron injection with 0 < К < 1, an order of magnitude
estimate of the average value of т», is obtained by multiplying the first term of (19.4-
10) by the factor СК, so that
Gkw, w
Tm &% ——+—. (19.4-11)
Ve У,

19.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 901
Reducing k shortens 7,, and 7 and hence increases the speed at which the APD oper-
ates. The associated hole current 7,,(t) and electron current i,(t) are also displayed in
Fig. 19.4-7. A more accurate theory is rather complex.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 19.4-1. Avalanche Buildup Time т a Si APD. Consider а silicon APD with
Wa = 50 pm, Wp, = 0.5 um, м. = 107 cm/s, м, = 5 x 106 cm/s, G = 100, and К = 0.1.
Equation (19.4-10) yields 7,, = 5 + 10 = 15 ps, so that (19.4-9) gives т = 1020 ps = 1.02 ns. On
the other hand, (19.4-11) yields т, = 60 ps, so that (19.4-9) provides т = 1065 ps = 1.07 ns. Fora
p-i-n photodiode with the same values of wa, ve, and м», the transit time is wy/Ve + Wa/Vv, © 1 ns.
The results do not differ greatly because т», is quite low in a Si SAM device.
ПИ
Materials
The materials used for the photosensitive absorption layers of APDs are closely related
to those used for p—i—n photodiodes (Fig. 19.3-9). The materials used for the multi-
plication layers should have values of the ionization ratio k that are as low as possible
for electron injection or as high as possible for hole injection; relatively large bandgap
energies are also useful for minimizing dark current.

Silicon and AlInAsSb APDs, which are principally used in the wavelength regions
700-900 nm and 1.3-1.6 jum, respectively, offer ionization ratios as low as К = 0.01-
0.02, and hence nearly negligible gain noise. Low-k materials suitable for use in the
ultraviolet include GaN and AlGaN, while HgCdTe finds use in the mid infrared.
тии |
EXAMPLE 19.4-2. InGaAs/InP SAM APD. InGaAs/InP SAM APDs, in which InGaAs and
InP serve as the materials used in the absorption and multiplication regions, respectively, have tradi-
tionally been used for optical fiber communication systems that operate in the 1.3—1.6-zm telecom-
munications band (Sec. 25.1D). Because they are easily fabricated and offer high responsivities
(Fig. 19.3-9), these devices continue to be used despite the somewhat unfavorable ionization ratio
for InP (1/k = 0.3). They are generally operated at voltages that lie between punchthrough and
breakdown (Fig. 19.4-8); as the reverse-bias voltage increases, so too do the gain and dark current.
Tens of volts of bias results in an electric field = 10° V/cm, which _is sufficient to initiate the
avalanche process. Typical values of the mean gain and bandwidth are С я 10 and В = 10 GHz,
respectively. In an SACM configuration, InGaAsP can serve as the charge layer. AlInAs is sometimes
used in place of InP for the multiplication region because of its more favorable ionization ratio (1/k =
0.2); in accordance with (19.4-11), this also provides higher speed.

10+

Gain region | Figure 19.4-8 Current—voltage char-

10 | acteristic for an InGaAs/InP separate

I absorption and multiplication (SAM)
< . I APD. The device is operated at a
5 108 Photocurrent / : Dark current р : reverse-bias voltage that lies between
8 „: punchthrough (the voltage at which the
vetoes vee 7 depletion region penetrates the absorp-
to 177: tion region) and breakdown (the volt-
4 t= —-— — 7 Breakdown: age at which uncontrolled avalanching
: voltage;
10-2 . occurs).
10 20 30
Reverse-bias voltage (V)

902 — СНАРТЕВ 19 PHOTODETECTORS
EXAMPLE 19.4-3. Се-оп-$!ЗАСМ АРО. The Ge-on-Si ЗАСМ APD, а group-IV-photonics
monolithic device, operates across most of the 1.3-1.6-илл telecommunications band. A principal
merit of this device is its CMOS compatibility and its availability for on-chip integration. The normal-
incidence device is fabricated such that the photons impinge on a Ge absorption layer grown atop a
layer of Si, in which carrier multiplication takes place; this avoids the intrinsic noisiness of carrier
multiplication in Ge (see Prob. 19.4-2). A Si charge layer maintains a low electric field in the ab-
sorption region to minimize dark current. With unintentionally doped Ge and Si layers of thicknesses
1 and % yum, respectively, and a 0.1-jum p-type Si charge layer, this APD exhibits the following
properties:’ mean gain G ~ 50; gain-bandwidth product GB = 350 GHz (substantially exceeding
that of an InGaAs/InP APD); responsivity К = 5.9 A/W at A, = 1.3 yum; ionization ratio К = 0.09;
and operation at bit rates of 25 Gb/s. The principal limiting features are: 1) the steep decrease in
the absorption coefficient of Ge for wavelengths greater than = 1.55 jum, and 2) the relatively large
dark current arising from deep-level traps associated with the lattice mismatch between Ge and Si.
Much as with Ge-on-Si waveguide photodiodes (Example 19.3-2), waveguide-based Ge-on-Si SACM
APDs decouple the light absorption and carrier collection, enabling these devices to offer both high
quantum efficiency and high speed.
EXAMPLE 19.4-4. AlinAsSb/GaSb SACM APD. The AlInAsSb SACM APD is а Ш-У
direct-bandgap device that operates across the 1.3—1.6-~m telecommunications band. This digital-
alloy material system, which is lattice matched to GaSb, offers a high absorption coefficient and is
suitable for designing complex structures. The Al,Inj_,,As,Sb;_, APD illustrated in Fig. 19.4-9
makes use of absorption and multiplication layers with low and high Al content, respectively, corre-
sponding to small and large energy bandgaps.’ It has a quantum efficiency 7 ~ 0.4 and a dark current
that is somewhat greater than that of the InGaAs/AlInAs APD, but substantially lower than that of
the Ge-on-Si APD. The ionization ratio k, which is comparable to that of Si, is approximately 0.01
at a mean gain G = 10 (Example 19.6-4). Digital alloys of AllnAs also prove useful in fabricating
low-noise APDs.
GaSb
- Substrate Figure 19.4-9 Structure of an Al,Inj_,As,Sb;_, separate
ее absorption, multiplication, and charge (SACM) APD with a lattice-
+ matched GaSb substrate. The device has a 1-ym-thick, n~-type
AlInAsSb absorption layer (x = 0.4, у = 0.3) surrounded by
a pair of 100-nm-thick, p*-type compositionally graded AlInAsSb
layers (not shown). A 150-nm-thick, p-type AllInAsSb charge layer
д (x = 0.7, у = 0.3) separates the absorption layer from the 1-ym-
AlinAsSb thick, n~-type AlInAsSb multiplication layer (2 = 0.7, у = 0.3).
APD tPlication The substrate is n+-type GaSb.
EXAMPLE 19.4-5. HgCdTe SAM APD. Hg,,Cd,_,Te is a II-VI direct-bandgap material
whose bandgap wavelength can be compositionally tuned from 0.85 to 16 ит (Fig. 17.1-8). This
material is useful for fabricating SAM APDs with cutoff wavelengths extending from 2 to 11 дм in
the mid infrared." HgCdTe APDs offer quantum efficiencies as high as 0.9, high gain (G > 1000),
and large gain—bandwidth products (GB > 1 THz), but they require cryogenic cooling. They exhibit
single-carrier-injection single-carrier-multiplication (SCISCM) behavior (electron multiplication
prevails for 0.2 < x < 0.6) with an ionization ratio К = 0, so they are very low-noise devices.
HgCdTe APDs are readily incorporated into focal plane arrays that are useful in a whole host of
low-flux and high-speed infrared applications, including imaging and lidar.
a

Т See D. Dai, M. Piels, and J. E. Bowers, Monolithic Germanium/Silicon Photodetectors with Decoupled
Structures: Resonant APDs and UTC Photodiodes, JEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics,
vol. 20, 3802214, 2014.

* See S.R. Bank, J. C. Campbell, S. J. Maddox, M. Ren, A.-K. Rockwell, M. E. Woodson, and S. D. March,
Avalanche Photodiodes Based on the AlInAsSb Materials System, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics, vol. 24, 3800407, 2018.

* See J. Beck, С. Wan, М. Kinch, J. Robinson, P. Mitra, К. Scritchfield, F. Ma, and J. Campbell, The HgCdTe
Electron Avalanche Photodiode, Journal of Electronic Materials, vol. 35, pp. 1166-1173, 2006.

19.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 903
B. History- and Position-Dependent Parameters
The theory for the conventional APD (CAPD) set forth in Sec. 19.4A is predicated
on the assumption that the probability that a carrier will effect an impact ionization
is independent of both its ionization history and the location at which the ionization
occurs. The ionization rate for the CAPD is thus taken to be the same at all times and
locations within the multiplication region.

These simplifying assumptions are not always applicable, however, and other con-
ditions can prevail:

= To garner sufficient energy so it can initiate an impact ionization, a newly gener-

ated carrier may need to travel some distance in the multiplication region, indi-
cating that the probability of impact ionization depends on the carrier’s ionization
history.

= The multiplication region of an APD can be bandgap-engineered in such a way

that it contains quantum wells, graded bandgaps, and/or other features that render
the probability of impact ionization dependent on the carrier’s location within the
device.

We proceed to consider APDs with history-dependent parameters and position-
dependent parameters in turn. Combinations of these features can be deliberately
incorporated into APD designs to reduce gain noise and improve performance.

APDs with History-Dependent Parameters

In certain cases, a newly generated carrier in the multiplication region of an APD can
cause an impact ionization only after traveling a certain distance that enables it to
accumulate sufficient energy from the electric field. The carrier ionization probability
is then zero immediately following its generation, and it remains zero over a distance
known as the dead space. A more accurate portrayal considers the carrier ionization
probability to slowly recover following its generation, in which case the recovery
distance is more properly termed sick space. In either case, the ionization coefficient
is clearly dependent on the carrier’s ionization history.

Specially designed multilayer APD structures can offer high-gain, low-noise, and
low-dark-current by appropriately tailoring their history-dependent parameters:

= Dead space. Dead space, which is inherent in the process of impact ionization,

regularizes the locations at which impact ionizations occur, thereby enhancing the
orderliness of the carrier-generation process, which reduces the gain noise. The
effect of dead space is particularly pronounced when the multiplication region is
thin and the number of multiplications is small.

= Initial-energy effects. Carriers traversing an appropriately designed field gradient

before entering the multiplication region can garner substantial kinetic energy,
thereby reducing the initial dead space in the multiplication region and thus fur-
ther regularizing the impact ionizations and reducing the gain noise.
The theory of gain noise for APDs with history-dependent parameters is outlined in
Sec. 19.6B.
APDs with Position-Dependent Parameters
Multilayer avalanche photodiodes can be fabricated with bandgaps and ionization co-
efficients that have arbitrary positional dependencies within each device layer. Special
cases of such multilayer devices are conventional, separate absorption and multiplica-
tion, multiquantum-well, and superlattice APDs.

Specially designed multilayer APD structures can offer high gain, low noise, and

low dark current by appropriately tailoring their position-dependent parameters:

904 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
= Position-dependent field gradients. A multilayer device can be designed such
that a carrier traversing it encounters energy-band discontinuities that accelerate
carriers at specific locations within the structure. The additional kinetic energy
suddenly imparted to a carrier can then selectively enhance the probability of
impact ionization.
= Position-dependent ionization thresholds. A multilayer device can be designed
such that a carrier traversing it encounters a sudden decrease in the ionization
threshold energy as it crosses from a layer of one material into a layer of another.
A carrier with insufficient energy in the first layer is then more likely to cause an
ionization upon entering the second layer.
The theory of gain noise for superlattice APDs (SAPDs), with their attendant position-
dependent parameters, is provided in Sec. 19.6B.
C. Single-Photon and Photon-Number-Resolving Detectors
Single-photon detectors are able to detect individual photons. This capability is im-
portant in a broad variety of applications that include imaging, lidar, remote sensing,
communications, astronomy, quantum optics, and quantum information. The perfor-
mance of a single-photon detector is assessed on the basis of a number of param-
eters, including spectral sensitivity, detection efficiency, dark-count rate, timing jitter,
maximum count rate, active area, operating temperature, and photon-number-resolving
capability.

We consider in turn three solid-state detectors suitable for detecting and counting
individual photons: single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs), silicon photomultipliers
(SiPMs), and superconducting single-photon detectors (SSPDs).

It is perhaps worth mentioning that there are several emerging technologies that
may (or may not) prove useful for achieving single-photon and photon-number-
resolving detection: 1) nonlinear-optical frequency up-conversion of IR photons to
visible wavelengths where single-photon detection is more efficient; 2) SCISCM Si:As
SAM devices operated at cryogenic temperatures; 3) superconducting nanowire single-
photon detectors (SNSPDs) operated at cryogenic temperatures; and 4) quantum-dot
and defect-based single-photon detectors.

Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes (SPADs)

Photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) have long been the workhorses of single-photon and
photon-counting systems (Sec. 19.1A). Visible and near-infrared PMTs exhibit spectral
sensitivities that extend from 150 to 1000 nm, detection efficiencies as high as 40%,
dark-count rates as low as 100 counts/s, timing jitter of 300 ps, maximum count rates
of 10 MHz, diameters ranging from mm to !/2 m, room-temperature operation, and
limited photon-number-resolving capability.

As a convenient solid-state alternative to the PMT, single-photon detection can be
achieved by making use of a single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD), which is also
known as a Geiger-mode avalanche photodiode since its operation is analogous to
that of the Geiger counter used to detect ionizing radiation. The SPAD is an APD
that is biased slightly above its avalanche breakdown voltage so that a single electron—
hole pair generated by the absorption of a photon is sufficient to precipitate avalanche
breakdown, creating a large current pulse that signifies the arrival of the photon. The
detector response is binarized in this mode of operation, which serves to mitigate gain
noise and circuit noise. The photon detection efficiency (PDE) 77 is the probability
that an incident photon generates a detectable electrical current in the output circuit.
Thermal, tunneling, and trapping processes in the semiconductor material also result in
the generation of electron-hole pairs that precipitate avalanches, and these events give
rise to a finite dark-count rate.

19.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODES 905
Each avalanche must be quenched to prepare the SPAD for the arrival of the next
photon. This quenching may be carried out by passive or active means:
= Passive quenching is most simply achieved by incorporating a high-resistance
series resistor in the SPAD circuit that develops a substantial voltage drop in
response to the avalanche current pulse, which reduces the voltage across the
diode and quenches the avalanche.
= Active quenching is more complex but allows for a substantially greater maximum
photon count rate. A fast discriminator senses the steep onset of the avalanche
current pulse across a series resistor and triggers circuitry that reduces the voltage
across the diode to below breakdown, which quenches the avalanche. The voltage
is then restored to a value above breakdown, and, after a recovery time of about
100 ns, the device is ready for the next photon. In practice, the recovery time
depends on the characteristics of the device as well as on its ancillary circuitry. It
can be abrupt or gradual, in which case it is represented by a dead time or sick
time, respectively. The dead time limits the maximum count rate of the detector
and is sometimes deliberately extended to suppress afterpulsing.
A number of materials are useful for fabricating SPADs in different wavelength
regions:
= Si SPADs operate in the visible and near infrared (350 < Ло < 900 nm). They
offer photon detection efficiencies as high as 65%, dark-count rates as low as
25 counts/s, timing jitter of 400 ps, maximum count rates of 10 MHz, diameters
of 100-200 ит, and room-temperature operation, but they do not offer photon-
number-resolving capability.
= InGaAs/InP SPADs, which operate in the near infrared (900 < Ло < 1700 nm)
are the devices of choice in the optical fiber telecommunications band, but their
performance is not nearly as good as that of Si SPADs. Because these devices
have inordinately high dark-count rates (typically > 20000 counts/s), they are
often cryogenically cooled and operated in a gated Geiger mode, which is suit-
able when the photon delivery time is known. They then offer photon detection
efficiencies of 10%, gated dark-count rates of 100 counts/s, timing jitter of 400 ps,
maximum count rates of 10 kHz, and diameters of 40 wm. Ge-on-Si SPADs are
also sometimes used in this wavelength region but their performance is inferior to
that of InGaAs/InP devices.
= HgCdTe SPADs are useful in the mid-infrared region while GaN and SiC SPADs
have found use in the ultraviolet. SiC has the particular merit that it can tolerate
high temperatures and hostile environments.
When operated individually, SPADs are typically only able to distinguish between the
detection of zero photons and one-or-more photons, thus obviating their use for photon-
number-resolving applications. This is because the detection of one photon leads to an
avalanche breakdown indistinguishable from that initiated by more than one photon.
Silicon Photomultipliers (SiPMs)
Though a stand-alone SPAD cannot distinguish between the detection of a single pho-
ton and multiple photons, photon-number-resolving capability can be achieved by
making use of multiple SPADs. In one configuration, a cascade of beamsplitters and
suitable delays can be used to splay the multiphoton pulse out in time so that the con-
stituent photons can be separately detected. Or, as with a microchannel plate (MCP),
the multiphoton pulse can be made to broadly illuminate an array of SPADs so that the
constituent photons are spatially splayed out among the individual SPADs.
The silicon photomultiplier (SiPM) is a Si SPAD spatial array in which a quench-
ing resistor is inserted in series with each SPAD and the summed output is fed to an

906 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
amplifier. The modus operandi of this device mimics that of human scotopic vision.
The SPADs that comprise the SiPM are analogous to the retinal rods in a receptive
field, and the SiPM collection circuit is analogous to the associated retinal ganglion
cell. A photon-number-resolving scheme such as this requires a sufficient number of
SPADs to mitigate the possibility of two or more photons being absorbed in any one
SPAD. Systems based on this architecture have the following salutary features:

= Immunity to dead time in the individual elements

= Enlarged photosensitive area

= Photon-number-resolving capability

= High sensitivity and gain

A typical SiPM is a two-terminal Si device with an area in the range of 1-50 mm?
that contains between hundred and thousands of Si SPADs, each of area 102—104 pm?.
Typical devices exhibit gains in the range G = 10° and overall decay times т = 100 ns.
SiPMs find applications in medical imaging, quantum optics, astrophysics, and high-
energy physics.
Comparison of SiPMs and PMTs. Since silicon photomultipliers and photomulti-
pler tubes serve similar functions, it is useful to consider their relative advantages:
Advantages of SiPMs over PMTs:

= Lower operating voltage (tens of volts)

= Higher spatial resolution

= Superior photon-number-resolving capability

= Smaller size

= More rugged construction

= Lower cost

= Immunity to magnetic fields (can be used in MRI and PET scanners)

= Absence of hysteresis

= Compatibility with semiconductor technology
Disadvantages of SiPMs with respect to PMTs:

= Operation restricted to the 300—900-nm spectral region

= Lower gain

= Longer response time

= Greater dark-count rate

= Lower sensitivity for small photon flux

= Higher excess noise factor (arising from crosstalk among elements)

= Inferior dynamic range

= Smaller photosensitive areas (although monolithic SiPM arrays are available)

= Greater sensitivity to temperature variations

= Greater susceptibility to damage from ionizing radiation
Silicon photomultipliers (SiPMs) and photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) thus play comple-
mentary roles in the domain of single-photon and photon-number-resolving detection.
The choice of which device to select depends on the intended use and the prevailing
experimental conditions.
CMOS-integrated SiPMs. The performance of SiPMs can be significantly en-
hanced by using CMOS technology to incorporate the constituent SPADs together
with their circuitry on the same silicon substrate. The compactness of such structures
reduces response time and time jitter, and thus leads to faster devices. Digital SiPMs
that employ direct pulse counting based on digital readout have also been developed.
Much like their analog counterparts, these devices, which are sometimes called digital
photon-counting (DPC) devices, deliver a collective output.

19.5 ARRAYDETECTORS 907
Superconducting Single-Photon Detectors (SSPDs)
Single-photon detection and photon-number-resolved detection can also be achieved
by making use of superconducting single-photon detectors (SSPDs) such as the
transition-edge sensor (TES). At its superconducting critical temperature, the TES
behaves as a microbolometer in which the absorption of a photon results in a steep
temperature-induced change in resistance. This enables a precise measurement of the
energy associated with an arbitrary number of absorbed photons, allowing highly re-
solved photon-number detection. TES devices can be constructed from materials such
as tungsten-on-silicon or NbN-on-sapphire, and are sensitive from the infrared to the
X-ray. TES devices exhibit jitters of 100 ns, bandwidths of 100 kHz, negligible dark
counts, and photon detection efficiencies in excess of 90% when embedded in suitable
optical-cavity structures. Their use in practice is complicated by the need for cryogenic
operation and by their small active areas.

In one configuration, photolithographically patterned 40-nm-thick tungsten thin
films are deposited on a Si substrate to form a 25 ит x 25 ит TES device. The
substrate is cooled to approximately 60 mK, about half the 100-mK superconducting-
to-normal transition temperature. The transition width is about 1 mK. A bias voltage
across the thin film maintains the temperature in the transition region via Joule heating.
An incident photon absorbed by the tungsten film raises its electron temperature,
thereby increasing its resistance. The time integral of the associated decrease in current
multiplied by the bias voltage yields the total photoelectric energy absorbed by the thin
film within its (slow) 15-5 thermal relaxation time. For light of a specified wavelength,
the number of photons incident within the thermal relaxation time is determined by
establishing the total energy transferred to the detector within this time. The signal is
read out of the detector using an array of DC superconducting quantum-interference
devices (SQUIDs), which operate as current-sensitive amplifiers.

19.5 ARRAY DETECTORS
An individual photodetector registers the photon flux incident upon it as a function of
time. Similarly, an array containing a large number of photodetectors simultaneously
registers the photon fluxes (as functions of time) at many spatial points. Array detec-
tors thus allow electronic versions of optical images to be formed. One type of array
detector, the microchannel plate [Fig. 19.1-2(c)], has already been discussed.

Modern microelectronics technology permits the fabrication of many types of array
detectors. These contain large numbers of photodetector elements, known as pixels,
that can operate as photoconductors, photodiodes, avalanche photodiodes, or thermal
detectors such as microbolometers. A 2D array of photosensitive elements designed
to record an electronic version of an image at the focal plane of an imaging system
is known as a focal-plane array (FPA). Two principal forms of readout circuitry
are used to transport the signals generated at the FPA: charge-coupled device (CCD)
technology and complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology.
Photodetector Elements
The pixels in a focal-plane array take many forms, as indicated by the following
examples:

= Microbolometer arrays are often used in thermal imaging cameras. Incident pho-

tons cause an increase in the temperature of the illuminated elements; the ac-
companying change in resistance is recorded by external circuitry. These devices
operate at ambient temperature and have come to the fore in recent years as their
resolution and sensitivity have improved dramatically. Vanadium oxide (VOx)
microbolometer arrays offer hundreds of thousands of pixels, each = 25 ит in

908 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
size, and are sensitive in the mid-infrared region. These devices find extensive use
in military and commercial applications.
= Photoconductive arrays are typically used in the mid-infrared region. A photon
whose energy is greater than the bandgap energy in a semiconductor such as InSb
or HgCdTe creates an electron—hole pair that contributes to the conductivity of
the material.
= Arrays of extrinsic semiconductors, such as Ge:Ga, are useful for making pho-
toconductive FPAs that are sensitive in the far-infrared. A photon places a donor
electron into the conduction band (or a receptor hole into the valence band) so
that it contributes to the conductivity.
= Quantum-well infrared photodetectors (QWIPs) are used in megapixel focal-
plane arrays. A photon provides sufficient energy to lift an electron out of a
quantum well so that it contributes to the conductivity. Far-infrared and mid-
infrared images are provided by GaAs/AlGaAs and GaAs/InGaAs/AlGaAs
elements.
= Arrays fabricated from compound-semiconductor p—i—n photodiodes, such as
InGaAs, GeSn, and HgCdTe, are used in the visible and infrared. A photon whose
energy is greater than the bandgap energy creates an electron-hole pair that con-
tributes to the diode current.
= Schottky-barrier photodiode elements fabricated from metal—semiconductor junc-
tions are used in highly versatile FPA cameras. A photon whose energy is greater
than the Schottky barrier creates an electron-hole pair that contributes to the diode
current. PtSi can be used for imaging in many spectral regions since it is sensitive
over a broad band of wavelengths stretching from the near ultraviolet to about 6
jm in the mid infrared. In spite of the fact that it has low quantum efficiency in
the infrared, PtSi is widely used since it is easily manufactured and highly stable.
= Avalanche-photodiode detectors fabricated from p—n junctions with multiplica-
tion regions have been crafted into array detectors. A photon whose energy is
greater than the bandgap energy creates an electron-hole pair that enters a high-
field semiconductor region that provides gain. The resulting sub-nanosecond elec-
trical pulse can have an amplitude sufficient to directly trigger a digital CMOS
circuit.
= Single-photon avalanche detectors (SPADs) fabricated from reverse-biased p—n
junctions make use of multiplication regions operated in Geiger mode. A photon
whose energy is greater than the bandgap energy creates an electron-hole pair that
enters the high-field semiconductor region, thereby causing avalanche breakdown
and the concomitant generation of a large current pulse.
= SPAD arrays have been developed in which the constituent SPAD outputs can
be individually read out and the entire array can be read out as a frame with
ps resolution. Devices that make use of active quenching, in conjunction with
in-pixel signal processing and analog-to-digital conversion, are available. Arrays
that make use of time-to-digital conversion make 3D single-photon imaging via
time-resolved detection feasible.
= Photosensitive arrays can also be operated as heterodyne detectors in which con-
version gain is provided by a local oscillator (Sec. 25.4).
Readout Circuitry
Two principal forms of readout circuitry are used to transport the signals from the
photodetector elements to the camera display or output: charge-coupled device (CCD)
technology and complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology.
CCD technology. A charge-coupled device (CCD) operates by converting photons
to photoelectrons at each detector element (pixel) and storing the photoelectrons in
local potential wells. Ага specified time, the charge is sequentially transferred, via а

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 909
buried CCD channel that serves as a shift register, from one detector position to another
until it is transported to one corner of the chip, where it is read out. Numerous electrode
structures and clocking schemes have been developed for periodically reading out the
charge accumulated at each CCD element and generating the electronic data stream
representing the image. In comparison with CMOS imaging systems, CCD systems
are typically more complex, require more power, and provide slower readout, but
they find widespread use in scientific and medical applications where high quality
imaging is mandatory. A variation on the theme of CCDs is the intensified charge-
coupled device (ICCD), which makes use of a microchannel-plate image intensifier
(Sec. 19.1A) placed before the CCD. Another variation is the electron-multiplying
charge-coupled device (EMCCD), which, just prior to readout, employs a supplemen-
tary high-voltage, serial electron-multiplication register that contains several hundred
electrodes and provides а gain of several thousand via secondary emission. ICCDs and
EMCCDs have comparable performance, although each has its own particular merits.
Single-photon and single-electron sensitivity has recently been achieved by making use
of a Si “skipper CCD” that reduces readout noise by sampling the charge associated
with each pixel multiple times.’

CMOS technology. Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) man-
ufacturing technology is widely used for fabricating electronic devices and integrated
circuits. Because it consumes little power, has good noise immunity, and is relatively
inexpensive, this technology has spurred the mass production of FPAs; photosensi-
tive group-IV detection elements can be directly integrated with the readout circuitry.
Each element in the photodetector array is individually linked to several metal-oxide-
semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) that amplify and read out the de-
tected signal. Unlike the sequential read-out required for CCDs, the detector elements
in a CMOS array are read out in parallel, which provides a significant speed advan-
tage. A variation on the theme of CMOS is scientific complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor (SCMOS), which makes use of a more advanced readout technol-
ogy that offers increased imaging area, higher frame rate, greater dynamic range,
higher quantum efficiency, and lower readout noise. sCMOS and EMCCD devices
are competitive; the choice depends principally on the application at hand. However,
at extremely low light levels (< 100 photons/pixel), and in the absence of back-
ground, a common rule-of-thumb dictates that EMCCD sensors are superior. Photon-
number-resolving megapixel image sensors, operating without the benefit of cooling
or avalanche gain, have also recently been developed.*

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS

Photodetectors are responsive to photon flux (or optical power). In accordance with
(19.1-4), an incident photon flux ® (optical power P = hv®) gives rise to a pro-
portional photocurrent $, = je® = КР. In actuality, however, the electric current
generated in a photodetector is a random quantity 1 that takes on values both below
and above its mean value 7 = i, = ne® = RP. (We use the symbols 2 and (x) inter-
changeably to represent the mean value of т.) The fluctuations of 7, which are generally
regarded as noise, are characterized by the variance of the current, о? = ((i —7)?), or
by its standard deviation о; = \/((1—1)2). For a current of zero mean (2 = 0), the
standard deviation becomes the root-mean-square (RMS) value о; = ,/ (i?) .

1 See J. Tiffenberg, М. Sofo-Haro, A. Drlica-Wagner, В. Essig, У. Guardincerri, $. Holland, T. Volansky, and
T.-T. Yu, Single-Electron and Single-Photon Sensitivity with a Silicon Skipper CCD, Physical Review Letters,
vol. 119, 131802, 2017.

* See J. Ma, $. Masoodian, О. А. Starkey, and E. R. Fossum, Photon-Number-Resolving Megapixel Image
Sensor at Room Temperature Without Avalanche Gain, Optica, vol. 4, pp. 1474-1481, 2017.

910 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
Sources of noise. A number of sources of noise are inherent in the process of pho-
todetection:

= Photon Noise. The most fundamental source of noise is associated with the ran-

dom arrivals of the photons themselves, which are usually described by Poisson
statistics, as discussed in Sec. 13.2C.

= Photoelectron Noise. In а photodetector with quantum efficiency 7 < 1, a single

arriving photon generates a photoelectron—hole pair with probability 7 and fails
to do so with probability 1 — 7. Because the deletion process is random it serves
as a source of noise, as shown in Sec. 13.2D.

= Gain Noise. The amplification process that provides internal gain in certain types

of photodetectors, such as photoconductors and APDs, is random. Each detected
photon (photoelectron) generates a random number of carriers G, with an average
value С’. The gain fluctuations depend on the nature of the amplification process,
as will be elucidated in Sec. 19.6B.

= Receiver Circuit Noise. Various components in the electrical circuitry of an optical

receiver, such as resistors and transistors, contribute to receiver circuit noise, as
will be considered in Sec. 19.6C.

These four sources of noise are illustrated schematically in Fig. 19.6-1. The mean
signal entering the detector (input optical signal) has an associated intrinsic photon
noise. The photoeffect converts the photons into photoelectrons. In the process, the
mean signal decreases by the factor 7 (the quantum efficiency). The associated photo-
electron noise also decreases, but by a lesser amount than the signal; thus the signal-to-
noise ratio of the photoelectron signal is lower than that of the incident photon signal.
If a photodetector gain mechanism is present, it amplifies both the photoelectron signal
and noise. Moreover, it introduces its own gain noise. Finally, circuit noise enters at the
point of current collection.

Photoelectron Circuit
Photoelectron Circuit noise noise
Photon noise noise Photon Gain
noise noise NOISE, Ee Ra ee
DERE ES bees TES grein oe sete
optical signal Пари
signal optical Detected
signal signal
Photoeffect and Photoeffect
current collection 1
Current
(a) (db) collection
Figure 19.6-1 Input and detected signals along with various sources of noise for (a) a
photodetector without gain, such as a p—i—n photodiode; and (b) a photodetector with gain, such
as an avalanche photodiode.
Performance measures. As components of an information transmission system,
photodetectors and optical receivers can be characterized by the following performance
measures:

= The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of a random variable is defined as the ratio of the

square of its mean to its variance. Thus, the SNR of the current i is SNR = 77/0?
while the SNR of the photon number 7 is SNR = 77/7.

19.6 NOISEINPHOTODETECTORS 911
= The minimum-detectable signal is defined as the mean signal that yields unity
SNR. In particular, the noise-equivalent power (NEP) is the signal power that
yields unity SNR at a bandwidth of 1 Hz. The specific detectivity D* is the
reciprocal of the NEP after normalization by the square root of the bandwidth
and the square root of the detector area.
и The excess noise factor F of a random variable is defined as the ratio of its mean-
square to its square-mean. Thus, the excess noise factor of the photodetector gain
Gis F = (G?)/(G)?.

= For an analog system, the receiver sensitivity is defined as the signal that corre-
sponds to a prescribed value of the signal-to-noise ratio, SNR = SNRo. While
the minimum-detectable signal corresponds to a receiver sensitivity that provides
SNRo = 1, a higher value of SNRo is often specified to ensure a given level
of accuracy (e.g., ЭМВо = 103, corresponding to 30 dB). For a digital system,
the receiver sensitivity is defined as the optical energy (or corresponding mean
number of photons) per bit required to achieve a prescribed bit error rate, which
is often set at BER = 107.

= The bit error rate (BER) is defined as the probability of error per bit in a digital

optical receiver.

We proceed to derive expressions for the signal-to-noise ratio, as well as for some
of the other performance measures discussed above, for photodetectors and optical
receivers subject to the four key sources of noise highlighted earlier. Sources of noise
that we do not explicitly consider include background noise and dark-current noise.
Background noise is photon noise associated with light from extraneous optical
sources (e.g., the sun, the stars) that manages to reach the photodetector. Background
noise is particularly deleterious in detection systems that operate in the mid- and
far-infrared spectral regions because of the copious thermal radiation emitted at these
wavelengths by objects at room temperature (Fig. 14.4-4). Photodetectors also generate
dark-current noise, which, as the name implies, is present even in the absence of
light. Dark-current noise results from surface leakage current as well as from random
electron-hole pairs generated by thermal and tunneling processes.

A. Photoelectron Noise
Photon Noise
As described in Sec. 13.2B, the photon flux associated with a fixed optical power
P is inherently uncertain. The mean photon flux is Ф = P/hy (photons/s), but this
quantity fluctuates randomly in accordance with a probability law that depends on the
nature of the light source. The number of photons n counted in a time interval T is
thus random with mean п = ФТ. For light from an ideal laser (Sec. 13.2C), or light
from a multimode thermal source (Probs. 13.2-6—13.2-8), the photon number obeys the
Poisson probability distribution, for which 02 = п. If 7 = 100, for example, the actual
number of photons observed will lie approximately in the range 100 + 10.
The photon-number signal-to-noise ratio SNR = 7?/c;? is therefore
SNR =n, (19.6-1)
Poisson Photon-Number
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
and the minimum-detectable photon number is п = 1 photon. If the observation time
T = 1 ws and the wavelength A, = 1.24 yum, this is equivalent to a minimum-
detectable power of 0.16 pW. The receiver sensitivity for SNRo = 103 (30 dB) is 1000
photons. If the time interval T = 10 ns, this is equivalent to a photon-flux sensitivity
of 10" photons/s or an optical power sensitivity of 16 nW at Л, = 1.24 pm.

912 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
Photoelectron Noise
A photon incident on a photodetector of quantum efficiency 7 generates a photoevent
(1.е., creates a photoelectron-hole pair or liberates a photoelectron) with probability
7, or fails to do so with probability 1 — я. Photoevents are assumed to be selected at
random from the photon stream. An incident mean photon flux Ф (photons/s) therefore
results in a mean photoelectron flux 7Ф (photoelectrons/s). The number of photoelec-
trons m detected in the time interval T is a random variable with mean
m=", (19.6-2)

where п = ФТ is the mean number of incident photons in the same time interval T. If
the photon number is distributed in Poisson fashion, so too is the photoelectron number,
as can be ascertained by using an argument parallel to that developed in Sec. 13.2D. It
follows that the photoelectron-number variance is equal to its mean, 1.е.,

о? =mM=nn. (19.6-3)
The photoelectron noise is clearly not additive with the photon noise.

The underlying Poisson randomness inherent in the photon number, which consti-
tutes a fundamental source of noise that must be contended with when using light to
transmit a signal, thus results in a photoelectron-number signal-to-noise ratio

SNR = т = и, (19.6-4)
Photoelectron-Number
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
in accord with (13.2-34). The minimum-detectable photoelectron number is т = уп =
1 photoelectron, corresponding to 1/7 photons. The receiver sensitivity for SNRo =
103 is 1000 photoelectrons or 1000/7 photons.
Photocurrent Noise
We now examine the properties of the electric current i(¢) induced in a circuit by
a random photoelectron flux of mean 7®. The treatment we provide includes the
effects of photon noise, photoelectron noise, and the characteristic time response of
the detector and circuitry (filtering). Every photoelectron—-hole pair generates a pulse
of electric current of charge (area) e and time duration 7, in the external circuit of
the photodetector (Fig. 19.6-2). A photon stream incident on a photodetector therefore
results in a stream of current pulses that add together to constitute the photocurrent i(t).
The randomness of the photon stream is transformed into a fluctuating electric current.
If the incident photons are Poisson distributed, the current fluctuations are known as
shot noise. More generally, for detectors with gain G' the generated charge in each
pulse is а = Ge.

Before providing an analytical derivation of the properties of the photocurrent i(t),
we examine the problem from a simplified perspective. Consider a photon flux ®
incident on a photoelectric detector of quantum efficiency 7. Let the random number
m of photoelectrons counted within a characteristic time interval T = 1/2B (the
resolution time of the circuit) generate a photocurrent i(t), where # is the instant of
time immediately following the interval T. For rectangular current pulses of duration
T, the current and photoelectron-number random variables are related by i = (е/Т)т.
The photocurrent mean and variance are therefore given by

веет (19.6-5)
в=—т .6-
T

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 913
Photons 20 © оо ооо ооо
Photoelectrons — фо e+e _e ___>
on ; eon t
т, = Area е
Current pulses -\ NX NAN | = >
Electric current | | |
(shot noise) К) | __М№ __ —-K-A-AL- MIATA ---ю
t
Figure 19.6-2 The photocurrent induced in a photodetector circuit comprises a superposition
of current pulses, each associated with a detected photon. The individual pulses illustrated are
exponentially decaying step functions but they can assume an arbitrary shape (see, e.g., Figs. 19.1-
6(b) and 19.1-7). The superposition of the individual current pulses constitutes shot noise.
е\2
д? = (=) a2, (19.6-6)
respectively, where т = n®T = 7Ф/2В is the mean number of photoelectrons col-
lected in the time interval T = 1/2B. Substituting 02 = т for Poisson photoelectrons
yields the shot-noise photocurrent mean and variance:
1 =en® (19.6-7)
Photocurrent Mean
о? = 2аВ. (19.6-8)
Photocurrent Variance
It follows that the signal-to-noise ratio of the shot-noise photocurrent, SNR = а / o?,
is
a Ф
SNR = 5 = aa =m. (19.6-9)
е Photocurrent
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
The current SNR is directly proportional to the photon flux ® and inversely propor-
tional to the electrical bandwidth of the circuit B. The result is identical to that for the
photoelectron-number signal-to-noise ratio т ‚ as expected, since the circuit introduces
no added randomness.
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 19.6-1. SNR and Receiver Sensitivity. For 7 = 10 nA and В = 100 MHz,
д; & 0.57 nA, corresponding to a signal-to-noise ratio SNR = 310 or 25 dB. An average of 310
photoelectrons are detected in every time interval T = 1/2B = 5 ns. The minimum-detectable
photon flux is Ф = 2В/1, and the receiver sensitivity for SNRo = 10° is Ф = 1000. (2B/n) =
2 x 10" /n photons/s.
«ПИ

914 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
C1 Derivation of the Photocurrent Mean and Variance. We now proceed to prove (19.6-7) and
(19.6-8) in the general case. Assume that a photoevent generated at $ = 0 produces an electric pulse
h(t), of area e, in the external circuit. A photoevent generated at time $, then produces a displaced
pulse, h(t — t,). Divide the time axis into incremental time intervals At so that the probability р that
а photoevent occurs within an interval is р = 7®At. The electric current i at time $ is written as
i(t) = > хи h(t - 1At), (19.6-10)
1
where X; assumes the value 1 with probability р, and 0 with probability 1 — р. The variables {X;}
are independent. The mean value of Ху is Ох (1 — р) + 1 x p = р. Its mean-square value is
(ХР) = 0? x (1-р) + 1° x p= р. The mean of the product X)X;, is р? if 1 4 К, and pif] = К.
The mean and mean-square values of i(t) are now determined via
7= (i) = Ур (Е At) (19.6-11)
[
(Р)=У`» (ХиХь) h(t = 1At) h(t - kAt)
lok
= SoS lp? h(t —1At) h(t — kAt) + So ph?(t — 1A). (19.6-12)
fk р
Substituting р = n®At, and taking the limit At — 0 so that the summations become integrals,
(19.6-11) and (19.6-12) yield, respectively,
t= no | h(t) dt = en® (19.6-13)
0
(i?) = (en®)? +n0 | 1? (Е) dt. (19.6-14)
0
It follows that
д? = (2) (4 = ие | h?(t) dt. (19.6-15)
Jo
Defining
1 [> © h?(t) dt
B= = | вое = oP Oa (19.6-16)
e* Jo 2 [Jo h(t) dt]
finally leads to (19.6-7) and (19.6-8). a
The parameter B defined by (19.6-16) represents the device/circuit bandwidth. This
is readily verified by noting that the Fourier transform of h(t) is its transfer function
H(v). The area under h(t) is simply Н(0) = e. In accordance with Parseval’s theorem
(A.1-7), the area under h?(t) is equal to the area under the symmetric function |H(v)|?,
so that
©! H(v) |?
В = ] Eo dv. (19.6-17)
о | H(0)
In accordance with (A.2-10), the quantity B is therefore the power-equivalent spectral
width of the function |H(v)| (i.e., the bandwidth of the device/circuit combination). Аз
an example, if H(v) = 1 for —v. < и < и. and 0 elsewhere, (19.6-17) yields В = 1.

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 915
These relations are applicable for all photoelectric detection devices without gain
(e.g., phototubes and junction photodiodes). Use of the formulas requires knowledge of
the bandwidth of the device, biasing circuit, and amplifier; B is determined by inserting
the transfer function of the overall system into (19.6-17).
B. Gain Noise
Deterministic gain. The photocurrent mean and variance for a device with determin-
istic (fixed) gain G is obtained by replacing e with 4 = Ge in (19.6-7) and (19.6-8),
which leads to
GnP
T= eGno = (19.6-18)
hv
о? = 2eGiB = 2e’G?nB®. (19.6-19)
The signal-to-noise ratio, in accordance with (19.6-9), then becomes
Й 7
SNR = —~ = — =™. 19.6-20
2GB 2B”
The SNR is independent of G because deterministic gain introduces no additional
randomness. This is confirmed by observing that the mean current 7, along with its
RMS value o;, are both multiplied by the same factor G.
Random gain. The simple results derived above do not apply when the gain itself
is random, as is the case in photomultiplier tubes, photoconductors, and avalanche
photodiodes. Appropriate expressions for the photocurrent mean and variance can be
determined by modifying the derivation provided in the previous section. In particular,
the electric current provided in (19.6-10) should be written as
i(t) =У` ХС h(t - 1At), (19.6-21)
|
where, as before, Ху takes the value | with probability р = 7®At, and 0 with probabil-
ity 1 — р. Now included in this expression is the random number G; that represents the
gain imparted to а photocarrier generated in the ИВ time slot, as shown in Fig. 19.6-3.
Photoelectrons
с 1
G, 5
G, с,
Randoml Ca
multiplied Figure 19.6-3 Each photoevent in
photoelectrons a photodetector with gain generates a
random number G; of carriers that give
и rise to electrical current pulses of area
. eG. The total electric current in the
с К detector circuit i(¢) is the superposition
' ЗЕМ --М-^ -~--4. i(t) of these pulses.
t

916 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
If the random variable G; has mean (С) = G, and mean-square (С), an analysis
analogous to that provided in (19.6-10)—(19.6-17) for Poisson photoelectrons yields
т = eGn® (19.6-22)
Photocurrent Mean
(Random Gain)
and
о? = 2eGiBF, (19.6-23)
Photocurrent Variance
(Random Gain)
where the excess noise factor F' is defined as
С?
Е = ) . (19.6-24)
(С) Excess Noise Factor
The excess noise factor is related to the variance of the gain 02 by F = 1+02/(G)?. In
the special case of deterministic gain, 02 = 0 and Е = 1, whereupon (19.6-23) reverts
to (19.6-19). For random gain, we have 02 > 0 and РЁ > 1; both of these quantities
increase with the severity of the gain fluctuations. The resulting electric current 7 then
exhibits fluctuations that are greater than those of shot noise.
In the presence of random gain, the current signal-to-noise ratio 7/0? becomes
z Ф/2В т
кв —^_ = "28 _ т, (19.6-25)
2eGBF Е Е Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(Random Gain)
where ™ is the mean number of photoelectrons collected in the time Т = 1/2B.
The random-gain SNR is smaller than the deterministic-gain SNR by the factor F’; the
reduction is a consequence of gain randomness. It is clear that the excess noise factor
F embodies the noise introduced by random gain in photodetectors.
EXAMPLE 19.6-2. Excess Noise Factor fora PMT. A photomultiplier tube achieves am-
plification by making use of secondary electron emission at its dynodes, as illustrated in Fig. 19.1-
2(b). The excess noise factor is readily calculated by assuming that the secondary-emission gain
random variable 6 is identically distributed, with Poisson counting statistics and mean gain 6 for all
dynodes except the first, which is endowed with gain Ад (typically, A >> 1). Under these conditions,
the excess noise factor for the PMT is determined to be
1 G/A-1
F-1=< lama} (19.6-26)
G |(G/A)VN —1
where G = A6% is the mean gain and М is the number of dynodes. The special case of all identical
dynodes and large gain is considered in Prob. 19.6-3. Equation (19.6-26) is plotted vs. G as the dashed
curves in Fig. 19.6-7 for N = 1, 4, and 10, assuming that A = 10 for the first (GaP) dynode. An
estimate of the magnitude of the gain fluctuations may be obtained by considering a PMT in which
the gain randomness yields an excess noise factor Р ~ 1.2. Since F = 14+ 02,/(G)?, the gain SNR
= (G)?/o2, = 1/(F — 1) +5. If the PMT has a mean gain G = 10°, the standard deviation of the
gain fluctuations is ое = 10°/V5.
ПОНИ

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 917
Excess Noise Factor for a Conventional APD
Conventional avalanche photodiodes (CAPDs) were examined in Sec. 19.4A. When
photoelectrons are injected at the edge of a uniform multiplication region in a CAPD,
the gain G' of the device is given by (19.4-8). It depends on the electron ionization
coefficient a, and the ionization ratio К = ал /@е, as well as on the width of the multi-
plication region w. The use of a similar (but more complex) analysis that incorporates
the randomness associated with the gain process leads to an expression for the mean-
square gain (С?) and the excess noise factor Г. This more general derivation provides
an expression for the mean gain G that is identical to that given in (19.4-8).

Calculations carried out by McIntyre in the mid-1960s reveal that the excess noise

factor Е for the CAPD is related to the mean gain and ionization ratio by
= 1
F=kG+(1-k)(2-=}. (19.6-27)
G Excess Noise Factor
(Conventional APD)
This formula is plotted in Fig. 19.6-4 with the ionization ratio k as a parameter.
1000
wy
= 100
3
п 10
ZZ
; |
1 10 100 1000
Mean gain G
Figure 19.6-4 Excess noise factor Е for a conventional APD (CAPD) with a uniform
multiplication region, under electron injection, as a function of the mean gain С’, for different values
of the ionization ratio k. For hole injection, 1/k replaces k.

Equation (19.6-27) is valid when electrons are injected at the edge of the mul-
tiplication region, but both electrons and holes have the capacity to initiate impact
ionizations. If only holes are injected, the same expression applies, provided that k
is replaced by 1/k. Gain noise is minimized by injecting the carrier with the higher
ionization coefficient, and by fabricating a structure with the lowest possible value of k
if electrons are injected, or the highest possible value of k if holes are injected. In short,
the ionization coefficients for the two carriers should be as different as possible. Equa-
tion (19.6-27) is said to be valid under conditions of single-carrier-injection double-
carrier multiplication (SCIDCM) since both types of carrier have the capacity to
impact ionize, even when only one type is injected. If electrons and holes are injected
simultaneously, the overall result is the sum of the two partial results.

918 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

The gain noise associated with a CAPD arises from two sources: the randomness
in the locations at which ionizations occur, and the feedback process associated with
the fact that both kinds of carrier can produce impact ionizations. The first of these
noise sources is present even when only one kind of carrier can multiply; it leads to
F —1=1-1/G (which is © 1 for large values of the mean gain G) as is apparent by
setting К = 0 in (19.6-27). This result is plotted vs. G as the dotted curve in Fig. 19.6-7
for purposes of comparison with the PMT and the staircase APD. The second source
of noise, the feedback process, is potentially more detrimental since it can result in a
far greater value of F’.
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 19.6-3. Excess Noise Factor for a Si ЗАМ APD. А separate absorption and
multiplication (SAM) Si reach-through APD such as that depicted in Fig. 19.4-6 has peak sensitivity
at a wavelength of 800 nm, quantum efficiency 7 = 0.8, and a gain—bandwidth product GB =
350 GHz. This SCIDCM device, which makes use of electron injection, has a mean gain G = 50 and
an ionization ratio К = 0.02. Equation (19.6-27) yields F' = 3 so that the gain mechanism reduces
the signal-to-noise ratio by a factor of 3 while increasing the mean detected current by a factor of
50. Silicon APDs are sensitive over a wavelength range that stretches from 450 to 1 100 nm and
can attain gains as high as 1000, depending on the device structure and reverse-bias voltage. In the
presence of circuit noise the use of an APD can serve to increase the overall system SNR, as discussed
in Sec. 19.6D.
EXAMPLE 19.6-4. Excess Noise Factor for an AllnAsSb SACM APD. _ The separate
absorption, charge, and multiplication (SACM) Alp.4Ino.¢Aso.3Sb9.7/Alo.7Ino.3ASo.3Sbo,7 APD con-
sidered in Example 19.4-4 makes use of absorption and multiplication layers with low and high Al
content, corresponding to small and large energy bandgaps, respectively. This device is sensitive over
telecommunications-band wavelengths (1.3 < Л, < 1.6 um). The ionization ratio К = 0.01 for
this SCIDCM APD is comparable to that of Si. For a mean gain G = 10, (19.6-27) yields Е = 2,
indicating that the gain mechanism reduces the signal-to-noise ratio by a factor of 2 and increases the
mean detected current by a factor of 10. As indicated above, the use of an APD can serve to increase
the overall SNR in the presence of circuit noise (Sec. 19.6D).
«И
Excess Noise Factor for APDs with History-Dependent Parameters
APDs with history-dependent parameters were introduced in Sec. 19.4B. A theory
of APD noise that accommodates dead space, along with initial carrier-energy and
impact-ionization threshold-energy effects, can be cast in the form of recurrence rela-
tions for the first and second moments, as well as the probability distribution, of the
numbers of electrons and holes. These random variables are deterministically related
to the random gain. Numerical solutions provide the mean gain and excess noise factor
for arbitrary values of dead space and multiplication-region width. The theory properly
predicts the performance of APDs in which history-dependent parameters play a role.

An example of the energy-band diagram for an APD with history-dependent pa-
rameters tailored to improve its performance is displayed in Fig. 19.6-5. Two thin
multiplication layers, with relatively low threshold energy, surround a layer with higher
threshold energy. Impact ionization is enhanced at the edges of the twin multiplication
layers and is suppressed in the central region, which serves to impart energy to the car-
riers in transit. The materials are chosen so that hole-induced ionization is discouraged.
The performance improvement is illustrated in Example 19.6-5.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 19.6-5. Excess Noise Factor for a GaAs/AlGaAs APD Influenced by Dead
Space. A very thin heterostructure APD similar to that displayed in Fig. 19.6-5 has a multi-
plication region comprising two 50-nm-thick layers of GaAs surrounding an 85-nm-thick layer of

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 919
hv o~
ллллл— ON
OO? Figure 19.6-5 Energy-band diagram of a
low-noise heterostructure APD with history-
dependent parameters, under reverse-bias
conditions.
Alp.¢Gao,4As. The measured excess noise factor is F = 2.5 at a mean gain G = 20. In contrast,
the excess noise factor predicted by (19.6-27) for а bulk GaAs homojunction APD (К = 0.75) is
Е = 15.5 at а = 20 (Fig. 19.6-4). The noisiness of this heterostructure device is thus substantially
lower than that predicted by the bulk theory, which ignores dead space as well as initial-energy
and impact-ionization threshold-energy effects. Evidently, such effects materially reduce gain noise
and must be accommodated when modeling thin-multiplication-region APDs. Other heterostructure
configurations, such as a centered-well configuration, can exhibit even lower values of F’ at small
values of G.
«ПИ
Excess Noise Factor for APDs with Position-Dependent Parameters
Multilayer APDs with arbitrary structure and position-dependent parameters were in-
troduced in Sec. 19.4B. A special case of this class of devices, the staircase avalanche
photodiode, has the energy-band diagram displayed in Fig. 19.6-6. A three-stage de-
vice is illustrated under both unbiased and reverse-biased conditions. The bandgap is
compositionally graded over a short distance, from a low value of E,; to a high value
of Ед2. Because of the material properties, hole-induced ionizations are discouraged.
Other potential advantages of these devices include the discrete locations of the mul-
tiplications (at the jumps in the conduction band edges), the low operating voltage
(which minimizes tunneling), and the fast response time (resulting from the reduced
avalanche buildup time).
hv -
wi 7 >
Е paar =
_ Ex, =
Е |
=====
(а) (b)
Figure 19.6-6 Energy-band diagram of а bandgap-engineered staircase avalanche photodiode
under (a) unbiased and (6) reverse-biased conditions. The conduction-band steps encourage electron
ionizations at discrete locations. (Adapted Нот Е. Capasso, W.-T. Tsang, and G. Е. Williams,
Staircase Solid-State Photomultipliers and Avalanche Photodiodes with Enhanced Ionization Rates
Ratio, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. ED-30, рр. 381-390, Fig. 1 ©1983 IEEE.)

920 — СНАРТЕВ 19 PHOTODETECTORS
Under single-carrier-injection single-carrier-multiplication (SCISCM) conditions,
the mean gain G of the staircase APD (Prob. 19.6-2) is
G=(14+P)%* (19.6-28)
and the excess noise factor is given by"
1 2 2
F==+— - — (19.6-29)
A(1/N A(1+1/N)?
а 5 а Excess Noise Factor
(Staircase APD)
where P is the probability of impact ionization at each stage and N is the number of
stages. Equation (19.6-29) is plotted as the solid curves in Fig. 19.6-7 (as the modified
excess noise factor F' — 1 vs. G) for N = 5 and 10.
10
—— Staircase APD
Ne ------ Conventional APD
7 № \ — — High-gain PMT
< 1 Nog
5 Ne ~~
Е ~~
о ~~
6 —-—^ ~~
2 jo} Ш
о ~ 7
: —
Е ^-
= 10? то
[= 10 4 т
=
10° 2 3 4 5 6
1 10 10 10° 10 10 10
Mean gain С
Figure 19.6-7 Modified excess noise factor F — 1 versus mean gain G for three photodetectors:
The SCISCM Staircase APD: The solid curves represent (19.6-29) with N = 5 and 10. The SCISCM
Conventional APD: The dotted curve represents (19.6-27) with k = 0. The SCISCM High-Gain-
First-Dynode PMT: The dashed curves represent (19.6-26) with A = 10 and N = 1, 4, and 10.
The modified excess noise factor Е — 1 is displayed because it is conveniently plotted on double-
logarithmic coordinates. The results presented represent optimal noise behavior for all three detectors.
Though the excess noise factor of the ideal staircase APD always lies below that of the conventional
APD, the difference is not large since Е < 2 for both devices. The PMT offers high gain and excellent
noise performance since the electrons travel in vacuum and it is a single-carrier device; however, its
sensitivity is typically restricted to wavelengths shorter than about 1 jm and its quantum efficiency
and responsivity are limited. (Adapted from M. C. Teich, K. Matsuo, and B. E. A. Saleh, Excess
Noise Factors for Conventional and Superlattice Avalanche Photodiodes and Photomultiplier Tubes,
IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. QE-22, pp. 1184—1193, Fig. 3 ©1986 IEEE.)
Taking (19.6-29) to the limit as № — со leads to Е = 2 — 1/G, which is identical
to the result obtained for the conventional APD under SCISCM conditions [(19.6-27)
* See К. Matsuo, М. С. Teich, and В. Е. A. Saleh, Noise Properties and Time Response of the Staircase
Avalanche Photodiode, Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. LT-3, рр. 1223-1231, 1985 [simultaneously
published in JEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. ED-32, pp. 2615—2623, 1985].

19.6 NOISEINPHOTODETECTORS 921
with К = 0], as expected. Though we deal with the graded-gap staircase APD for
purposes of illustration, (19.6-28) and (19.6-29) are applicable for any superlattice
avalanche photodiode (SAPD) in which the carrier transport is perpendicular to the
superlattice planes. In such structures, the carriers encounter a potential discontinuity
at the heterointerfaces at each period of the multilayer structure.

Initial attempts to operate a staircase APD using GaAs/AlGaAs were impeded by
insufficiently large conduction-band offsets and small energy separations between
the direct and indirect band-structure valleys, so that the merits of the staircase
structure could not be unequivocally demonstrated. However, recent work with the
AlInAsSb/GaSb system has shown that the staircase concept is feasible (Example 19.6-
6). The development of low-noise APDs based on narrow-bandgap semiconduc-
tor materials is a worthy enterprise since such structures can serve as “solid-state
photomultipliers” at infrared wavelengths, where night-vision and thermal-imaging
applications abound.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 19.6-6. Excess Noise Factor for an AllnAsSb/GaSb Staircase APD. А
one-stage staircase APD operates on the basis of photogenerated electrons in a wide-bandgap (E, =
1.16 eV) AlInAsSb injector region entering a thin, narrow-bandgap (Е, = 0.25 eV) InAsSb mul-
tiplication region.’ The conduction-band-edge energies at the interface of the materials differ by
= 0.6 eV, which is sufficient to permit impact ionization in the InAsSb with high probability, since
its ionization threshold energy is == 0.4 eV. The impact ionization is observed as a current gain of
С = 1.8 + 0.2 that persists over a broad range of excitation wavelengths, excitation intensities,
reverse-bias voltages, and operating temperatures. Monte Carlo simulations confirm the presence of
robust impact ionization by electrons within the thin InAsSb layer and essentially none by holes. The
device thus behaves as a SCISCM staircase APD. In accordance with (19.6-28) and (19.6-29) for
N = 1, we deduce фа Р =С —1= 0.8 + 0.2 and Е = 3/G —2/С = 1, respectively, over the
range of observed values of G.
«ПИ
Excess Noise Factor for Dark Current т the Multiplication Region
The output current of an APD fluctuates in the presence of light as well as in its
absence. The dark-current noise arises from effects that are both external to, and in-
ternal to, the depletion and multiplication regions of the device. The surface-leakage
dark current bypasses both regions and thus is not subject to gain noise. However,
carrier pairs randomly generated by tunneling or thermal processes in the interior
of many conventional and multilayer APDs are subject to multiplication, and thus
to gain noise, much as for photogenerated carrier pairs. The dark carriers generated
within the multiplication region are randomly distributed throughout it so that they
experience a smaller mean gain, and a larger excess noise factor, than the carriers
injected at its edge. Photogenerated carriers produced by light that impinges on the
multiplication region are also subject to this increased excess noise. To minimize this
effect, multiplication regions are generally fabricated using semiconductor materials of
higher bandgap, which serves to limit tunneling and thermal processes, and the ensuing
dark current. Expressions for the mean gain and excess noise factor for dark carriers
generated within the multiplication region, as well as for dark and photogenerated
carriers generated in the depletion region, and arbitrary superpositions thereof, have
been set forth for multilayer APDs of arbitrary structure.*

1 See М. Ren, 5. Maddox, У. Chen, М. Woodson, J. С. Campbell, and S. Bank, AlInAsSb/GaSb Staircase
Avalanche Photodiode, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 108, 081101, 2016.

= See М. 7. Hakim, В. Е. A. Saleh, and М. С. Teich, Generalized Excess Noise Factor for Avalanche
Photodiodes of Arbitrary Structure, JEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 37, рр. 599—610, 1990.

922 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

C. Circuit Noise

Yet additional noise is introduced by the electronic circuitry associated with an optical
receiver. Circuit noise results from the thermal motion of charged carriers in resistors
and other dissipative elements (thermal noise) and from fluctuations of charge carriers
in transistors used in the receiver amplifier, as well as from 1/f-type effects.
Thermal Noise

Thermal noise (also called Johnson noise or Nyquist noise) arises from the random
motion of mobile carriers in resistive electrical materials at finite temperatures; this
gives rise to a random electric current i(t) even in the absence of an external electrical
power source. The thermal electric current in a resistance R is a random function i(t)
whose mean value (i(¢)) = 0. The variance of the current o?, which is the same as its
mean-square value since the mean vanishes, increases with the temperature T’.

Using the results of a derivation based on statistical mechanics, to be presented
shortly, a resistance R at temperature T exhibits a random electric current i(t) charac-
terized by a power spectral density

4 hf
$i(f) = = ——— 19.6-30
where f is the frequency. In the region f < kT/h, which is the frequency range
of principal interest since kT /h = 6.24 THz at room temperature, exp(hf/kT) =
1+ hf /kT, so that
Si(f) = АКТ/В. (19.6-31)
The variance of the electric current is the integral of the power spectral density over all
frequencies within the bandwidth В of the circuit, 1.е.,
B
о? = ] 5: (1) df. (19.6-32)
0
Hence, for В < kT/h this leads to
о? = 4КТВ/В. (19.6-33)
Thermal Noise Current
Variance (Resistance R)
Thus, as shown in Fig. 19.6-8, a resistor R at temperature T in a circuit of bandwidth
B behaves as a noiseless resistor in parallel with a zero-mean noise current source with
an RMS value o; specified by (19.6-33).
Figure 19.6-8 A resistance R at temperature T is
equivalent to a noiseless resistor in parallel with a
R 0} noise current source whose mean is zero and whose
variance is given by о? = (i*) = 4kTB/R, where В
is the circuit bandwidth.
EXAMPLE 19.6-7. Thermal Noise in a Resistor. A 1-kQ resistor at T = 300° К, in a
circuit of bandwidth В = 100 MHz, exhibits an RMS thermal noise current о; = 41 nA.
ПОНИ

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 923
С  *Derivation of the Power Spectral Density of Thermal Noise. We derive (19.6-30) by
showing that the electrical power associated with the thermal noise in a resistance is identical to the
electromagnetic power radiated by a one-dimensional blackbody. The factor hf /[exp(hf/kT) — 1]
in (19.6-30) is recognized as the mean energy Е of an electromagnetic mode of frequency } (the
symbol и is reserved for optical frequencies) in thermal equilibrium at temperature T’ [see (14.4-8)].
Equation (19.6-30) may therefore be written as S;(f)R = АЕ. The electrical power dissipated by
a noise current 7 passing through a resistance В is (i7)R = о? В, so that S;(f)R represents the
electrical power density (per Hz) dissipated by the noise current i(t) through В.

We now proceed to demonstrate that 4F is the power density radiated by a one-dimensional black-
body. As discussed in Sec. 14.4B, an atomic system in thermal equilibrium with the electromagnetic
modes in a cavity radiates a spectral energy density o(v) = M(v)E, where M(v) = 8rv?/c? is the
three-dimensional density of modes, and the spectral intensity density is co(v). Though the charge
carriers in a resistor move in all directions, only motion in the direction of the circuit current flow
contributes. The density of modes in a single dimension is M(f) = 4/c modes/m-Hz [see (11.1-10)]
so that the corresponding energy density is o(f) = M(f)E = 4E/c and the radiated power density
is co(f) = АЕ, as promised. и
1/f Noise
Another form of noise associated with some components that comprise the electronic
circuitry of an optical receiver exhibits a power spectral density with a power-law form:
S(f) = (f/fo)~°. The multiplicative constant [© determines the absolute strength of
the fluctuations at all frequencies while the exponent —a characterizes the relative
strength of the fluctuations at different frequencies. Noise of this form is typically
referred to as 1/f* noise or 1/f-type noise. In the particular case when a = 1,
common appellations are 1/f noise, excess noise, flicker noise, and pink noise. The
latter terminology arises from an analogy with visible light. For a spectrum of the
form S(f) сх 1/f, each octave is endowed with equal power so that lower frequencies
(“red’’) are weighed more heavily than higher frequencies (“blue’’), resulting in a spec-
trum with a pink tinge. Since no strict standard for this nomenclature exists, however,
the foregoing descriptions are all used to describe 1/f® noise when a is roughly in the
vicinity of unity.

Fluctuations of this form are ubiquitous in electronics and photonics. 1/f% noise was
discovered, along with thermal noise, in early studies of low-frequency circuits. Such
fluctuations are also widely observed in components, materials, and devices, including
resistors, semiconductors, metal films, superconductors, thermionic-emission devices,
and junction devices. In electronics, the range of frequencies over which such behavior
is manifested can stretch over 12 orders of magnitude or more, and a typically lies
between 0.8 and 1.4. From a practical perspective, devices and systems subject to 1/f®
noise are often operated at frequencies that are sufficiently high so that this noise is
negligible.

The origins of 1// noise remain obscure for many components, materials, and
devices. The underlying mechanism is often associated with fluctuations of the number,
or the mobility, of the charge carriers, but other causes have been postulated. 1/f-
type noise is thought by some to be a surface effect whereas others attribute it to
bulk behavior. Moreover, behavior of this kind is not restricted to simple systems;
complex systems also exhibit 1/f% noise. Although ubiquitous, this type of noise is
not universal; it is not present, for example, in wire-wound resistors.

Circuit-Noise Parameter: Resistance-Limited and Amplifier-Limited
Optical Receivers

It is convenient to lump the various sources of circuit noise in an optical receiver
(thermal noise in resistors as well as noise in transistors and other circuit devices)

924 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
into a single random current source 7, at the receiver input that produces the same total
noise at the receiver output (Fig. 19.6-9). The mean value of 2, is zero while its variance
о? depends on temperature, receiver bandwidth, circuit parameters, and device type.
о+ о+
Ф Ф
WW 2 Mv A
Noisy (~) Noiseless
Figure 19.6-9 A noisy receiver circuit (left) can be replaced by a noiseless receiver circuit that
has a single random current source with RMS value о’, at its input (right).
It is also convenient to define a dimensionless circuit-noise parameter
Г Or

‘ее 2еВ’
where В is the receiver bandwidth and Т = 1/2B is the receiver resolution time. Since
о, is the RMS value of the noise current, о’, /е is the RMS electron flux (electrons/s)
arising from circuit noise, and о. = (о,/е)Т thus represents the RMS number of
circuit-noise electrons collected in the time Т. The circuit-noise parameter од is a
figure of merit that characterizes the quality of the optical receiver circuit, as will
become apparent in Sec. 19.6D.

An optical receiver comprising a photodiode in series with a load resistor Rr,
followed by an amplifier, is illustrated in Fig. 19.6-10. This simple receiver is said to
be resistance-limited if the circuit-noise current arising from thermal noise in the load
resistor substantially exceeds noise contributions from other sources. The amplifier
may then be regarded as noiseless and the circuit-noise mean-square current is simply
o2 = 4kT B/R_. The circuit-noise parameter defined by (19.6-34) is therefore

| КТ
ети, Circuit-Noise Parameter
(Resistance-Limited Receiver)
which is inversely proportional to the square-root of the bandwidth B.
+
®
WWW>
To noiseless Figure 19.6-10 Resistance-limited opti-
amplifier cal receiver.

К,
ПИ
EXAMPLE 19.6-8. Circuit-Noise Parameter for а Resistance-Limited Receiver. At
room temperature, a resistance А, = 50 О in a circuit of bandwidth В = 100 MHz generates
a random current of RMS value о, = 0.18 yA. This corresponds to a circuit-noise parameter
ва © 5700.
ПОНИ

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 925

A receiver using a well-designed low-noise amplifier can yield a smaller circuit-
noise parameter than a resistance-limited receiver. Consider a receiver using an FET
amplifier. Tf the noise arising from the high input resistance of the amplifier can be
neglected, the receiver is limited by thermal noise in the channel between the FET
source and drain. With the use of an equalizer to boost the high frequencies attenuated
by the capacitive input impedance of the circuit, for typical circuit component values
the circuit-noise parameter at room temperature turns out to be

VB .
Og ® 00 (Bin Hz). (19.6-36)
10 Circuit-Noise Parameter
(FET Amplifier Receiver)
For example, if В = 100 MHz, then o, = 100, which is significantly smaller than the
circuit-noise parameter associated with а 50-0 resistance-limited amplifier of the same
bandwidth (Example 19.6-8). The circuit-noise parameter o, increases with В because

of the effect of the equalizer."

A receiver that makes use of a bipolar-transistor amplifier, on the other hand, has a
circuit-noise parameter o, that is independent of the bandwidth В over a wide range
of frequencies. For bandwidths between 100 MHz and 2 GHz, a, is typically = 500,
provided that appropriate transistors are used and that they are optimally biased.

D. Signal-to-Noise Ratio and Analog Receiver Sensitivity
The simplest measure of the quality of reception in an analog communication system
is the signal-to-noise ratio. The SNR of the current at the input to the noiseless circuit
represented in Fig. 19.6-9 is the ratio of the square of the mean current to the sum of
the variances of the constituent sources of noise:
a 2
72
z eGn®
SNR = = (eG) . (19.6-37)
2eGiBF +0; 2е?СуВФЕ + o2 Optical Receiver
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
The leftmost terms in the denominators represent photoelectron and gain noise [see
(19.6-23)] while the rightmost terms represent circuit noise. For a detector devoid of
gain, we have G = Тапа F' = 1. The noiseless circuit in Fig. 19.6-9 does not alter the
signal-to-noise ratio even if it provides amplification.
НИ
EXERCISE 19.6-1
Signal-to-Noise Ratio of a Resistance-Limited Receiver. Assume that the optical receiver
portrayed in Fig. 19.6-10 makes use of an ideal p—i—n photodiode (7 = 1) and that the resistance
Rr = 50 О at T = 300° К. The bandwidth is В = 100 MHz. At what value of the photon flux ® is
the photoelectron-noise current variance equal to the resistor thermal-noise current variance? What is
the corresponding optical power at A, = 1550 nm?
НИ

{ See $. D. Personick, Optical Fiber Transmission Systems, Plenum, 1981, Sec. 3.4; note that the parameter

Gq is equivalent to 2/2 in this reference.

926 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
It is useful to recast the SNR in (19.6-37) in terms of the mean number of detected
photons ™ in the resolution time of the receiver T = 1/2B,
— пФ
= ФТ = — 19.6-38
m=" 2B? ( )
and the circuit noise-parameter og = 0, /2Be. The resulting expression is simply
2
Gm?
С Fm + 02 Signal-to-Noise Ratio
for an Optical Receiver
Equation (19.6-39) has a straightforward interpretation. The numerator is the square
of the mean number of multiplied photoelectrons detected in the receiver resolution
time Т = 1/2B. The denominator is the sum of the variances of the number of
photoelectrons and the number of circuit-noise electrons collected in T.
For a photodiode without gain we have G = F' = 1, so that (19.6-39) reduces to
т?
M+ 04 Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(Unity-Gain Receiver)
The relative magnitudes of m and 0? establish the relative importance of photoelectron
noise and circuit noise. The manner in which the parameter ох characterizes the cir-
cuit’s performance as an optical receiver is now apparent. For example, if о. = 100,
then circuit noise dominates photoelectron noise provided that the mean number of
photoelectrons recorded per receiver resolution time is below 10000.

We proceed now to examine the dependence of the SNR on photon flux ®, receiver
circuit-noise parameter o,, mean gain G, and receiver bandwidth В. This will allow
us to determine when the use of an avalanche photodiode is beneficial and will permit
us to select an appropriate optical preamplifier for a given photon flux. In undertaking
this parametric study, we rely on the expressions for the SNR provided in (19.6-37),
(19.6-39), and (19.6-40).

Dependence of the SNR on Photon Flux
The dependence of the SNR on т = 7Ф/2В provides an indication of how the SNR
varies with the photon flux Ф. Consider first a photodiode without gain, in which case
(19.6-40) applies. Two limiting cases are of interest:
1. Circuit-noise limit. If Ф is sufficiently small, such that < оо (Ф < 2Bo?/n),
photon noise is negligible and circuit noise dominates, yielding
т?
SNR = —>. (19.6-41)
94

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 927
2. Photon-noise limit. If the photon flux ® is sufficiently large, such that m >> 0?
(Ф > 2Bo;, /n), the circuit-noise term can be neglected, whereupon
SNR = т. (19.6-42)
For small 77 , therefore, the SNR is proportional to т? and thereby to Ф?, whereas for
large т it is proportional to т and thereby to ®, as illustrated in Fig. 19.6-11. For all
levels of light, the SNR increases with increasing incident photon flux ®; more light
improves receiver performance.
SNR
10°
Figure 19.6-11 Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
as a function of the mean number of photo-
103 o,= 10 electrons per receiver resolution time, т =
n®/2B, for a photodiode at two values of the
o, = 100 circuit-noise parameter oq.
10
10 10° 10° m
When is an APD Superior to a Photodiode?
We now compare two receivers that are identical in all respects except that one exhibits
no gain, while the other exhibits mean gain G' together with an excess noise factor F’
(e.g., an APD). For sufficiently small ™ (or photon flux ®), circuit noise dominates.
Amplifying the photocurrent above the level of circuit noise would then improve the
SNR so that the APD receiver would be superior. For sufficiently large т (or photon
flux), circuit noise is negligible. Amplifying the photocurrent then introduces gain
noise, thereby reducing the SNR. The photodiode receiver would then be superior.
Comparing (19.6-39) and (19.6-40) reveals that the SNR of the. APD receiver is
greater than that of the photodiode receiver when т < 07(1—1/G")/(F — 1). For
а > 1, the APD provides an advantage when т < on / (Е — 1). If this condition is not
satisfied, the use of an APD compromises, rather than enhances, receiver performance.
When од is very small, for example, it is evident from (19.6-39) that the APD SNR =
m/F is inferior to the photodiode SNR. = т. The SNR is plotted as a function of m
for the two receivers in Fig. 19.6-12.
SNR . —
Figure 19.6-12 SNR versus т = n®/2B Юга
я photodiode receiver (solid curve) and for an APD
105 OC receiver with mean gain С' = 100 and excess noise
07 factor F' = 2 (dashed curve) obtained from (19.6-
оо И 39). The circuit-noise parameter о. = 100 in both
M=o, - Ч arr
р cases. For small photon flux (circuit-noise-limited
103 “7 case), the APD yields a higher SNR than the
APD. 7” photodiode. For large photon flux (photon-noise
Yo Photodiode limited case), the photodiode receiver is superior
“ to the APD receiver. The transition between the
10 ; = two regions occurs at mM ~ 02 /(F — 1) = 10%.
10 10° 10 m

928 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
Dependence of the SNR on APD Gain
As indicated above, the use of an APD with large gain is beneficial when the photon
flux is sufficiently small, 1.е., when m < 07 /(F — 1). The optimal gain of the APD is
then determined by making use of (19.6-39):
52
а?т
М”. (19.6-43)
С Е + о} /т
However, the excess noise factor F is itself a function of С for a conventional APD,
as is clear from (19.6-27). Substituting (19.6-27) into (19.6-43) yields
2
а?т
SNR = "9 _____, (19.6-44)
kG” +(1—k)(2G" —G) о /т
where k is the APD carrier ionization ratio specified in (19.4-1). Equation (19.6-44)
is plotted in Fig. 19.6-13 for т = 1000 and о. = 500, with К as a parameter.
For the single-carrier-multiplication APD (k = 0), the SNR increases with gain and
eventually saturates. For the double-carrier multiplication APD (К > 0), the SNR
initially increases with increasing gain, but then reaches a maximum beyond which
it decreases with increasing gain as a result of the sharp increase in gain noise. In
general, therefore, there is an optimal value of the APD gain.
SNR
10°
k=0 Figure 19.6-13 Dependence of the SNR
102 on the APD mean gain G for different values
01 of the ionization ratio k when m = 1000 and
| 0 = 500. Smaller values of К allow larger
10 gain, higher receiver sensitivity, and larger
10 values of the gain—bandwidth product.
1
1 10 10° 10° G
Dependence of the SNR on Receiver Bandwidth
The relation between the SNR and the circuit bandwidth B is implicit in (19.6-37). It
is governed by the dependence of the circuit-noise current variance о? on В. Consider
three receivers:
1. The resistance-limited receiver exhibits o «x В [see (19.6-33)] so that
SNR « 1/B. (19.6-45)
2. The FET amplifier receiver obeys og < B‘/? [see (19.6-36)] so that о, =
2eBoy < B/? [see (19.6-34)]. This indicates that the dependence of the SNR
on B in (19.6-37) assumes the form
SNR х 1/(B + 8B’), (19.6-46)
where 3 is a constant.

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 929

3. The bipolar-transistor amplifier receiver has a circuit-noise parameter о. that is

approximately independent of В. Thus, о’. сх В so that (19.6-37) takes the form
SNR хх 1/(B + s'B?), (19.6-47)
where s’ is a constant.

These relations are illustrated schematically in Fig. 19.6-14. The SNR always de-
creases with increasing B. For sufficiently small bandwidths, all three receivers exhibit
an SNR that varies as 1/B. For large bandwidths, the SNRs for the FET and bipolar-
transistor receivers decline more sharply with bandwidth.

SNR
FET
- 1/B3 Figure 19.6-14 Double-logarithmic plot illustrat-
Bipolan tap ing the dependence of the SNR on the circuit
(ор bandwidth В for the resistance-limited receiver, the
1/B? bipolar-transistor receiver, and the FET receiver.
1/B
B
Analog Receiver Sensitivity
The receiver sensitivity is the minimum photon flux Фо, and its corresponding mini-
mum optical power Ро = hy®y and minimum mean number of photoelectrons то =
7Фо/2В, required to achieve a prescribed value of signal-to-noise ratio SNRo. The
quantity то can be determined by solving (19.6-39) for SNR = SNRo.

We consider only the unity-gain receiver, setting aside the more general solution as
Exercise 19.6-2. Solving the quadratic equation (19.6-40) for то, we obtain

Mo = 5 [snr + \/SNR¢ + 40? SNR | ; (19.6-48)

Two limiting cases emerge:
Photon-noise limit (of < 7SNRo): то = SNRo (19.6-49)
Circuit-noise limit (о? > 1 SNRo): то = VSNRo oq. _  (19.6-50)
Receiver Sensitivity
(Unity-Gain Receiver)

930 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 19.6-9. Sensitivity of an Analog Receiver. Assume that ЗМВо = 10%, cor-
responding to an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio of 40 dB. If the receiver circuit-noise parameter
90а < 50, the receiver is photon-noise limited and its sensitivity is то = 10000 photoelectrons
per receiver resolution time. In the more likely situation for which о. >> 50, the receiver sensitivity
А 10004. По. = 500, for example, the sensitivity is то = 50000, which corresponds to 2Вто =
10°B photoelectrons/s. The optical power sensitivity Ро = 2BMphv/n = 10°Bhy/n is directly
proportional to the bandwidth. If B = 100 MHz and 7 = 0.8, then at A, = 1550 nm the receiver
sensitivity is Ро = 1.6 и\.
ПИ
When using (19.6-48) to determine the receiver sensitivity, it is important to keep in
mind that the circuit-noise parameter оу is, in general, a function of the bandwidth В,
in accordance with:
Resistance-limited receiver: 04x 1/VB
FET amplifier: OgxvB
Bipolar-transistor amplifier: од independent of В.
For these receivers, the receiver sensitivity то therefore depends on the receiver band-
width B as illustrated in Fig. 19.6-15. The optimal choice of receiver therefore depends
in part on the bandwidth B.
Figure 19.6-15 Double-logarithmic plot
of receiver sensitivity то (minimum mean
. number of photoelectrons рег receiver res-
5 $. Dipolar р olution time Т = 1/2В that guarantees
2 Nin, —-—--—— & a minimum signal-to-noise ratio ЭМВо) аз
Е С a function of the receiver bandwidth В,
я for three receivers. The curves approach
~ Photonnoiselimit. SS the photon-noise limit at values of B for
ооо which 02 < 1/4SNRb. In the photon-noise
limit (when circuit noise is negligible), the
B sensitivity то is equal to SNRo in all cases.
НИ
EXERCISE 19.6-2
Sensitivity of an Analog APD Receiver. Derive an expression analogous to (19.6-48) for the
sensitivity of a receiver that incorporates an APD with mean gain G and excess noise factor РЁ. Show
that in the limit of negligible circuit noise, the receiver sensitivity reduces to
ee

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 931
E. Bit Error Rate and Digital Receiver Sensitivity
The sensitivity of an analog receiver was defined in Sec. 19.6D as the minimum power
of the received light (or the corresponding mean number of photons or photoelec-
trons) required to achieve a prescribed signal-to-noise ratio SNRo. We now turn to the
direct-detection digital communications receiver. In this case, the receiver sensitivity
is defined as the minimum optical energy (or corresponding mean number of photons)
per bit necessary to achieve a prescribed bit error rate (BER). The calculations are
carried out in the context of an ON—OFF keying (OOK) system: the logic states “1” and
“0” of a bit represent, respectively, the presence and absence of an optical pulse. We
first determine the receiver sensitivity under ideal conditions, when the photodetector
has unity quantum efficiency and only photon noise is present. We then consider the
increase in sensitivity (decrease in performance) that results from incorporating pho-
toelectron noise, background noise, photodetector gain noise, and circuit noise into
the system. The performance of direct-detection and coherent-detection optical fiber
communication systems are considered in detail in Secs. 25.2 and 25.4, respectively.
Sensitivity of the Ideal Digital Optical Receiver
Assume that the logic states “1” and “0” in an OOK system correspond to the presence
and absence of optical energy, respectively; in state “1” an average of n photons is
received while in state “0” no photons are received. If the two states are equally likely,
the overall mean number of photons per bit is по = оп. Since the actual number of
detected photons is random, errors in logic-state identification occur, as portrayed in
Fig. 19.6-16(а).
1011010041 1
Transmitted NEE
ai ELL ACCC
Received | $ | | | ' о | | | | a PA
photos $ $ 8 ГГ |
Е и N
готоотоо г ТА ||
Reproduced \ | | PT | TK
(a) Error om  ° ют
Figure 19.6-16 (а) Schematic illustrating errors that result from randomness in the photon
number. (6) Bit error rate (BER) versus mean number of photons per bit по for an ideal, direct-
detection OOK system in which the only source of noise is Poisson photon fluctuations.

For light generated by most optical sources, including laser diodes, lasers, and light-
emitting diodes, the probability of finding n photons in a fixed time interval T obeys the
Poisson distribution, p(n) = 7" exp(—7)/n!, where п is the mean number of photons
(Sec. 13.2C). The ideal direct-detection OOK receiver is designed in such a way that it
decides that “1” has been transmitted if it detects one or more photons. The probability
рт of mistaking “1” for “0” is therefore given by the Poisson probability of detecting
zero photons: р1 = p(0) = ехр(—п ). When state “0” is transmitted, zero photons are
detected; the receiver then correctly decides that state “0” has been transmitted and the
error probability ро = 0. The bit error rate is the average of the two error probabilities,

932 — СНАРТЕВ 19 PHOTODETECTORS
BER = $(p1 + ро), from which we find
1 = 1 —
BER = 5ехр(—й) = 5ехр(—2%0). (19.6-52)

Figure 19.6-16(6) portrays a semilogarithmic plot of this relation.

The receiver sensitivity is defined as the average number of photons per bit required
to achieve a specified value of the BER. In particular, fora BER = 107”, an oft-chosen
metric, (19.6-52) yields по = 10 photons per bit. We conclude that:

The receiver sensitivity for a direct-detection, binary OOK communication sys-

tem that is ideal in every respect except for the Poisson statistics of the detected

photon number is 10 photons per bit at a BER of 10~°.

The ideal receiver sensitivity can be improved, in principle, by making use of photon-

number-squeezed (sub-Poisson) light (Sec. 13.3C).

И

EXERCISE 19.6-3

Effect of Quantum Efficiency and Background Noise on Receiver Sensitivity.

(a) Show that for a receiver using a photodetector of quantum efficiency 7, but that is otherwise
ideal, BER = р ехр(—2 то), so that the receiver sensitivity is по = 10/7 photons рег bit at a
BER = 10-9, corresponding to то = 7p = 10 photoelectrons per bit.

(b) Assume that states “1” and “0” correspond, respectively, to mean photon numbers N+7ig and пв,
where п is the mean number of signal photons and fig is the mean number of detected Poisson-
distributed background photons that is independent of the signal. Determine an expression for
the BER as a function of 7 and fig. Plot the BER versus fio = 3n for several values of Nip.
Determine the receiver sensitivity Mp as a function of Ng from this plot. [Hint: The sum of two
Poisson-distributed random variables is also Poisson-distributed. ]

НИ

Sensitivity of a Digital Receiver with Circuit Noise and Gain Noise

As elucidated in Sec. 19.6A, a photodetector transforms a fraction 7 of the incident

photons into charge carriers, each of which then contributes a charge e to the electric

current in the external circuit. The total charge accumulated in the bit time interval T

is m (units of electrons). If the incident photons obey a Poisson distribution with mean

п, the photoelectrons also obey a Poisson distribution with mean т = 7n and variance

m.

Additional noise is introduced into the receiver circuit via a random electric current
1. with zero mean and a probability distribution that is approximately Gaussian with

. 2 . . р . . _ 7 .
variance о. Within the bit time interval T, the accumulated charge а = i, Г/е (units
of electrons) has an RMS value o, = о, T/e. The circuit-noise parameter о. depends
on the receiver bandwidth B, as represented in (19.6-34).

The total accumulated charge per bit s = т - 4 (units of electrons) is thus the sum
of a Poisson random variable т and an independent Gaussian random variable 4. Its
mean ju is the sum of the means,

в =т = тп, (19.6-53)
and its variance о? is the sum of the variances,
2_— 2
o =M+ 0%. (19.6-54)

19.6 NOISE INPHOTODETECTORS 933
For m sufficiently large, the Poisson distribution may itself be approximated by a
Gaussian distribution so that the overall distribution can be cast in the form of a
Gaussian distribution of mean jy and variance a”. We adopt this approximation in the
following analysis. _

For an avalanche photodiode (APD) of mean gain С’, the mean number of photoelec-
trons is multiplied by the factor G; gain noise is also introduced by the multiplication
process. The mean of the total collected charge per bit s (units of electrons) is then

и=та (19.6-55)
while the variance is
o=mG F+o?2, (19.6-56)
where F = (G”)/(G)? is the APD excess noise factor [see (19.6-24)].

The direct-detection OOK receiver determines the charge s accumulated in each bit
(by use of an integrator, for example) and compares it with a prescribed threshold 9. If
s > 9, state “1” is selected; otherwise, state “О” is selected. The probabilities of error,
р1 and ро, are determined from two Gaussian probability distributions in s with the
following parameters:

mean jlo = 0, variance 00 = 07 for state “0”
_ о (19.6-57)
mean 1 = ТС, varianceo? = MG Е + 07 for state “1”.
The probability ро of mistaking “0” for “1” is the integral of a Gaussian probability
distribution p(s) with mean jig and variance од, from s = 9 to $ = oo. The probability
py of mistaking “1” for “0” is the integral of a Gaussian probability distribution with
mean 1 and variance o?, from s = —oo to s = 9. The threshold 9 is selected such
that the average probability of error, BER = $(Do + py), is minimized.

An analysis along these lines is the basis of the conventional theory of binary
detection in the presence of Gaussian noise, which is widely applicable (indeed we
shall make use of it in our analysis of coherent communication systems in Sec. 25.4).
If 0 and o, and 11 and a7, are the means and variances associated with two Gaussian
variables representing states “0” and “1”, respectively, and if оо and о1 are much
smaller than 1 — 40, it can be shown that the bit error rate for an optimal-threshold
receiver is given by

BER = 3[{1 — erf(Q/V2)]. (19.6-58)
Here
От (19.6-59)
0, +09
and the error function erf(z) is defined as
erf(z) 2 Je (—a?) а (19.6-60)
=) = —= xp(—2*) dx. .6-
vm Jo

934 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
From (19.6-58) we know that a BER of 10~° corresponds to Q = 6, whereupon (19.6-
59) provides
шт — bo & 6(o4 + бо). (19.6-61)
Condition for BER = 10~°
(Gaussian Approximation)

Substituting (19.6-57) into (19.6-61), defining то = тт as the mean number of

photoelectrons detected per bit, and working through some algebra yields

то = 18F + 60,/G. (19.6-62)
Equation (19.6-62) relates the receiver sensitivity, specified by the mean number of
photoelectrons per bit 79 required to render the BER = 10-9, to the APD and circuit-
noise parameters G’, Е’, and оч. The approximation serves well for the parameter values
observed in actual systems.

When the APD gain is sufficiently large such that ЗС ЕР >> од, the second (circuit-
noise-dependent) term on the right-hand side of (19.6-62) can be neglected, whereupon

то © 18F. (19.6-63)

APD Receiver Sensitivity

(Absence of Circuit Noise)

According to (19.6-63), a receiver that has negligible circuit noise, and makes use of a

photodiode with no gain (G = Тапа F = 1), exhibits a receiver sensitivity то = 18

photoelectrons per bit ata BER = 10-9. This result differs from the 10-photoelectrons-

per-bit sensitivity established earlier for this ideal receiver. The discrepancy arises

because of the replacement of the Poisson distribution by a Gaussian distribution,
which is inaccurate for small photon numbers.

Typical sensitivities for several direct-detection, OOK receivers are provided
in Table 19.6-1. It is of interest to compare these results with those presented in
Table 25.4-1 for coherent-detection systems.

Table 19.6-1 Typical values of the sensitivity (number of photons per bit) for several direct-
detection, OOK optical receivers with amplifier and circuit noise when operated at a BER = 107°,
assuming that the photodetector quantum efficiency 7 = 1. The actual values depend on the amplifier
parameters G' and F as well as on the receiver circuit-noise parameter o,, which in turn depends on
the bit rate Во = 1/T.

Receiver Receiver Sensitivity (photons/bit)
Photon-limited ideal detector 10
Si APD 125
Er?*-doped silica-fiber preamplifier /InGaAs p-i—n photodiode 215
InGaAs APD 500
p—i-n photodiode 6000

READING LIST 935
READING LIST

Photodetectors

See also the reading lists in Chapters 17 and 18.

B. Nabet, ed., Photodetectors: Materials, Devices and Applications, Elsevier-Woodhead, 2016.

$. М. Ahmed, Physics and Engineering of Radiation Detection, Elsevier, 2nd ed. 2015.

A. Beling and J. С. Campbell, Advances in Photodetectors and Optical Receivers, in I. Р. Kaminow,
T. Li, and A. E. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-A: Components and Subsys-
tems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

О. М. Bose, Photodetectors, in $. 5. Jha, ed., Perspectives in Optoelectronics, World Scientific, 1995,
Chapter 6, pp. 299-384.

Photoemission, Photomutltiplier Tubes, and Microchannel Plates

А. G. Wright, The Photomultiplier Handbook, Oxford University Press, 2017.

C. Warner, Photomultiplier Tubes Detect Neutrinos Changing Identities, SPIE Professional Maga-
zine, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 20-23, 2016.

R. Locher, L. Castiglioni, M. Lucchini, M. Greif, L. Gallmann, J. Osterwalder, M. Hengsberger, and
U. Keller, Energy-Dependent Photoemission Delays from Noble Metal Surfaces by Attosecond
Interferometry, Optica, vol. 2, рр. 405—410, 2015.

К. Watase, Photomultiplier Tubes: «PMT is Key to High-Performance Portable Devices, Laser Focus
World, vol. 49, по. 5, рр. 60-62, 2013.

T. Hakamaka et al., eds., Photomultiplier Tubes: Basics and Applications, Hamamatsu Photonics, 3rd
ed. 2007.

М. Lampton, The Microchannel Image Intensifier, Scientific American, vol. 245, no. 5, pp. 62-71,
1981.

R. W. Engstrom, RCA Photomultiplier Handbook (PMT-62), RCA Electro Optics and Devices (Lan-
caster, PA), 1980.

W. Shockley and J. R. Pierce, A Theory of Noise for Electron Multipliers, Proceedings of the IRE,
vol. 26, pp. 321-332, 1938.

У. К. Zworykin, G. A. Morton, and L. Malter, The Secondary Emission Multiplier—A New Elec-
tronic Device, Proceedings of the IRE, vol. 24, pp. 351-375, 1936.

Н. Iams and В. Salzberg, The Secondary Emission Phototube, Proceedings of the IRE, vol. 23, pp. 55—
64, 1935.

A. Einstein, Uber einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden heuristischen
Gesichtspunkt, Annalen der Physik, vol. 322, pp. 132-148, 1905 [Translation: Concerning an
Heuristic Point of View Toward the Emission and Transformation of Light, American Journal of
Physics, vol. 33, pp. 367—374, 1965].

H. Hertz, Ueber einen Einfluss des ultravioletten Lichtes auf die elektrische Entladung [Concerning
an Influence of Ultraviolet Light on the Electrical Discharge], Annalen der Physik, vol. 267,
pp. 983-1000, 1887.

Photoconductivity

N. V. Joshi, ed., Selected Papers on Photoconductivity, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 56), 1992.

N. V. Joshi, Photoconductivity: Art, Science, and Technology, CRC Press, 1990.

A. Rose, Concepts in Photoconductivity and Allied Problems, Wiley, 1963; Krieger, reissued 1978.

Group-IV, Graphene, Plasmonic, and Organic Photodetectors

D. Thomson, A. Zilkie, J. E. Bowers, T. Komljenovic, G. T. Reed, L. Vivien, D. Marris-Morini,
Е. Cassan, L. Virot, J.-M. Fédéli, J.-M. Hartmann, J. H. Schmid, D.-X. Xu, Е. Boeuf, P. O’Brien,
G. Z. Mashanovich, and M. Nedeljkovic, Roadmap on Silicon Photonics, Journal of Optics, vol.
18, 073003, 2016.

T. Pham, W. Du, H. Tran, J. Margetis, J. Tolle, G. Sun, R. A. Soref, H. A. Naseem, B. Li, and S.-Q. Yu,
Systematic Study of Si-Based GeSn Photodiodes with 2.6 ит Detector Cutoff for Short-Wave
Infrared Detection, Optics Express, vol. 24, pp. 4519-4531, 2016.

936 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

A. Di Bartolomeo, Graphene Schottky Diodes: An Experimental Review of the Rectifying Graphene/
Semiconductor Heterojunction, Physics Reports, vol. 606, pp. 1-58, 2016.

D. Natali and M. Caironi, Organic Photodetectors, in B. Nabet, ed., Photodetectors: Materials,
Devices and Applications, Elsevier-Woodhead, 2016.

M. Kielar, O. Dhez, G. Pecastaings, A. Curutchet, and L. Hirsch, Long-Term Stable Organic Pho-
todetectors with Ultra Low Dark Currents for High Detectivity Applications, Scientific Reports,
vol. 6, 39201, 2016.

K.-J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi, and Y.-Y. Noh, Organic Light Detectors: Photodiodes
and Phototransistors, Advanced Materials, vol. 25, рр. 4267—4295, 2013.

X. An, Е. Liu, У. J. Jung, and $. Kar, Tunable Graphene-Silicon Heterojunctions for Ultrasensitive
Photodetection, Nano Letters, vol. 13, pp. 909-916, 2013.

A. V. Zayats and S. A. Maier, eds., Active Plasmonics and Tuneable Plasmonic Metamaterials,
Wiley—Science Wise, 2013.

L. Vivien, A. Polzer, D. Marris-Morini, J. Osmond, J. M. Hartmann, P. Crozat, E. Cassan, C. Kopp,
H. Zimmermann, and J. М. Fédéli, Zero-Bias 40 Gb/s Germanium Waveguide Photodetector on
Silicon, Optics Express, vol. 20, pp. 1096-1101, 2012.

H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Plasmonics for Improved Photovoltaic Devices, Nature Materials,
vol. 9, pp. 205-213, 2010.

Н. В. Stuart and О. G. Hall, Absorption Enhancement in Silicon-on-Insulator Waveguides Using
Metal Island Films, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 69, рр. 2327—2329, 1996.

Infrared Photodetectors

7. Jak8i¢é, Micro and Nanophotonics for Semiconductor Infrared Detectors: Towards an Ultimate
Uncooled Device, Springer-Verlag, 2014.

M. A. Kinch, State-of-the-Art Infrared Detector Technology, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2014.

A. Rogalski, Infrared Detectors, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2nd ed. 2011.

C. Jagadish, ed., Semiconductors and Semimetals, S. Gunapala and D. Rhiger, eds., Volume 84,
Advances in Infrared Photodetectors, Academic Press/Elsevier, 2011.

A. Daniels, Field Guide to Infrared Systems, Detectors, and FPAs, SPIE Optical Engineering Press,
2nd ed. 2010.

H. Schneider and H. C. Liu, Quantum Well Infrared Photodetectors: Physics and Applications,
Springer-Verlag, 2007.

A. Rogalski, ed., Selected Papers on Infrared Detectors: Developments, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 179), 2004.

E. L. Dereniak and G. D. Boreman, Infrared Detectors and Systems, Wiley, 1996.

A. Rogalski, ed., Selected Papers on Semiconductor Infrared Detectors, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 66), 1992.

N. Sclar, Properties of Doped Silicon and Germanium Infrared Detectors, Progress in Quantum
Electronics, vol. 9, pp. 149—257, 1984.

R. J. Keyes, ed., Optical and Infrared Detectors, Volume 19, Topics in Applied Physics, Springer-
Verlag, 2nd ed. 1980.

К. К. Willardson and А. С. Beer, eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Infrared Detectors II, Aca-
demic Press, vol. 12, 1977.

В. О. Hudson, Jr. and J. У. Hudson, eds., Benchmark Papers in Optics / 2: Infrared Detectors,
Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross, 1975.

R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Infrared Detectors, Aca-
demic Press, vol. 5, 1970.

Avalanche Photodiodes and Gain Noise

$. В. Bank, J.C. Campbell, $. J. Maddox, М. Ren, A.-K. Rockwell, M. Е. Woodson, and $. О. March,
Avalanche Photodiodes Based on the AlInAsSb Materials System, JEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 24, 3800407, 2018.

J. C. Campbell, Recent Advances in Avalanche Photodiodes, Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 34, pp. 278—285, 2016.

READINGLIST 937

D. Dai, M. Piels, and J. E. Bowers, Monolithic Germanium/Silicon Photodetectors with Decoupled
Structures: Resonant APDs and UTC Photodiodes, JEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics, vol. 20, 3802214, 2014.

A. Singh, V. Srivastav, and R. Pal, HgCdTe Avalanche Photodiodes: A Review, Optics & Laser
Technology, vol. 43, рр. 1358-1370, 2011.

J. Beck, С. Wan, М. Kinch, J. Robinson, P. Mitra, К. Scritchfield, F. Ma, and J. Campbell, The
HgCdTe Electron Avalanche Photodiode, Journal of Electronic Materials, vol. 35, рр. 1166-1173,
2006.

M. M. Hayat, O.-H. Kwon, S. Wang, J. C. Campbell, B. E. A. Saleh, and M. C. Teich, Boundary
Effects on Multiplication Noise in Thin Heterostructure Avalanche Photodiodes: Theory and
Experiment, JEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 49, pp. 2114—2123, 2002.

P. Yuan, S. Wang, X. Sun, X. G. Zheng, A. L. Holmes, Jr., and J. C. Campbell, Avalanche Photo-
diodes with an Impact-Ionization-Engineered Multiplication Region, IEEE Photonics Technology
Letters, vol. 12, рр. 1370-1372, 2000.

M. M. Hayat, B. E. A. Saleh, and M. C. Teich, Effect of Dead Space on Gain and Noise of Double-
Carrier-Multiplication Avalanche Photodiodes, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 39,
pp. 546-552, 1992.

N. Z. Hakim, B. E. A. Saleh, and M. C. Teich, Generalized Excess Noise Factor for Avalanche
Photodiodes of Arbitrary Structure, JEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 37, pp. 599-
610, 1990.

M. C. Teich, K. Matsuo, and B. E. A. Saleh, Excess Noise Factors for Conventional and Superlat-
tice Avalanche Photodiodes and Photomultiplier Tubes, EEE Journal of Quantum Electronics,
vol. QE-22, pp. 1184-1193, 1986.

R. Chin, N. Holonyak, Jr., G. E. Stillman, J. Y. Tang, and K. Hess, Impact Ionization in Multilayered
Heterojunction Structures, Electronics Letters, vol. 16, рр. 467—469, 1980.

K. Nishida, K. Taguchi, and Y. Matsumoto, InGaAsP Heterostructure Avalanche Photodiodes with
High Avalanche Gain, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 35, рр. 251-253, 1979.

H. W. Ruegg, An Optimized Avalanche Photodiode, JEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. ED-
14, pp. 239-251, 1967.

R. J. McIntyre, Multiplication Noise in Uniform Avalanche Diodes, [EEE Transactions on Electron
Devices, vol. ED-13, рр. 164—168, 1966.

К. М. Johnson, High-Speed Photodiode Signal Enhancement at Avalanche Breakdown Voltage, IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. ED-12, рр. 55-63, 1965.

SPADs, SiPMs, and SSPDs

S. Piatek and E. Hergert, Detector Options for Low-Light Applications, Photonics Spectra, vol. 51,
no. 10, pp. 54—58, 2017.

D. Durini, U. Paschen, A. Schwinger, and A. Spickermann, Silicon Based Single-Photon Avalanche
Diode (SPAD) Technology for Low-Light and High-Speed Applications, in B. Nabet, ed., Pho-
todetectors: Materials, Devices and Applications, Elsevier-Woodhead, 2016.

N. Dinu, Silicon Photomultipliers (SiPM), in B. Nabet, ed., Photodetectors: Materials, Devices and
Applications, Elsevier-Woodhead, 2016.

T. Gerrits, A. Lita, B. Calkins, and S. W. Nam, Superconducting Transition Edge Sensors for Quan-
tum Optics, in R. H. Hadfield and G. Johansson, eds., Superconducting Devices in Quantum
Optics, Springer, 2016.

М. О. Eisaman, J. Fan, А. Migdall, and $. У. Polyakov, Invited Review Article: Single-Photon
Sources and Detectors, Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 82, 071101, 2011.

R. H. Hadfield, Single-Photon Detectors for Optical Quantum Information Applications, Nature
Photonics, vol. 3, рр. 696-705, 2009.

А. Е. Lita, A. J. Miller, and $. W. Nam, Counting Near-Infrared Single-Photons with 95% Efficiency,
Optics Express, vol. 16, pp. 3032-3040, 2008.

О. A. Ramirez, М. М. Hayat, G. Karve, J. С. Campbell, $. М. Torres, B. E. A. Saleh, and М. С. Teich,
Detection Efficiencies and Generalized Breakdown Probabilities for Nanosecond-Gated Near In-
frared Single-Photon Avalanche Photodiodes, JEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. 42,
рр. 137-145, 2006.

938 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

G. N. Gol’tsman, O. Okunev, G. Chulkova, A. Lipatov, A. Semenov, K. Smirnov, B. Voronov,
A. Dzardanov, C. Williams, and R. Sobolewski, Picosecond Superconducting Single-Photon
Optical Detector, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 79, pp. 705—707, 2001.

A. Smith, ed., Selected Papers on Photon-Counting Detectors, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Mile-
stone Series Volume 143), 1998.

О. H. Andrews, W. Е. Brucksch, Jr., W. T. Ziegler, and E. В. Blanchard, Attenuated Superconductors
I. For Measuring Infra-Red Radiation, Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 13, pp. 281-292,
1942.

Array and Imaging Detectors

X. Sun, J. B. Abshire, J. D. Beck, P. Mitra, K. Reiff, and G. Yang, HgCdTe Avalanche Photodiode
Detectors for Airborne and Spaceborne Lidar at Infrared Wavelengths, Optics Express, vol. 25,
pp. 16589-16602, 2017.

B. Aull, Geiger-Mode Avalanche Photodiode Arrays Integrated to All-Digital CMOS Circuits, Sen-
sors, vol. 16, 495, 2016.

T. Kuroda, Essential Principles of Image Sensors, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2014.

D. Durini, ed., High Performance Silicon Imaging: Fundamentals and Applications of CMOS and
CCD Sensors, Elsevier-Woodhead, 2014.

С.С. Holst and T. $. Lomheim, CMOS/CCD Sensors and Camera Systems, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press, 2nd ed. 2011.

W. S. Boyle, Nobel Lecture: CCD — An Extension of Man’s View, Reviews of Modern Physics,
vol. 82, рр. 2305-2306, 2010.

С.Е. Smith, Nobel Lecture: The Invention and Early History of the CCD, Reviews of Modern Physics,
vol. 82, pp. 2307-2312, 2010.

A. Rogalski, J. Antoszewski, and L. Faraone, Third-Generation Infrared Photodetector Arrays, Jour-
nal of Applied Physics, vol. 105, 091101, 2009.

M. G. Kang, ed., Selected Papers on CCD and CMOS Imagers, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 177), 2003.

Photon, Photoelectron, and Circuit Noise in Photodetectors

Е. Sackinger, Analysis and Design of Transimpedance Amplifiers for Optical Receivers, Wiley, 2018.

S. B. Lowen and M. C. Teich, Fractal-Based Point Processes, Wiley, 2005.

H. A. Haus, Electromagnetic Noise and Quantum Optical Measurements, Springer-Verlag, 2000.

M. C. Teich and B. E. A. Saleh, Branching Processes in Quantum Electronics, JEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 6, pp. 1450-1457, 2000.

A. Papoulis, Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes, McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed. 1991.

A. van der Ziel, Noise in Solid State Devices and Circuits, Wiley, 1986.

M. J. Buckingham, Noise in Electron Devices and Systems, Wiley, 1983.

О. К. Cox and У. Isham, Point Processes, Chapman & Hall, 1980.

В. Е. A. Saleh, Photoelectron Statistics, Springer-Verlag, 1978.

J. В. Johnson, The Schottky Effect in Low Frequency Circuits, Physical Review, vol. 26, pp. 71-85,
1925.

W. Schottky, Uber spontane Stromschwankungen in verschiedenen Elektrizititsleitern [Concerning
Spontaneous Current Fluctuations in Various Electrical Conductors], Annalen der Physik, vol. 57,
рр. 541-567, 1918.

$. О. Poisson, Recherches sur la probabilité des jugements en matiére criminelle et en matiére
civile, précédées des régles générales du calcul des probabilités [Research on the Probability
of Judgments in Criminal and Civil Matters, Preceded by the General Rules for the Calculation
of Probabilities], Bachelier, 1837.

PROBLEMS
19.1-1 Effect of Reflectance on Quantum Efficiency. Calculate the factor J = 1 — & in the
expression for the photoelectric-detector quantum efficiency provided in (19.1-3), under
both normal and 45° incidence, for an unpolarized light beam incident from air onto Si,
GaAs, and InSb (refer to Sec. 6.2 and Table 17.2-1).

PROBLEMS 939

19.1-2 Maximum Responsivity. Determine the maximum responsivity of an ideal (unity quantum
efficiency and unity gain) semiconductor photodetector fabricated from (a) Si; (b) GaAs;
and (c) InSb.

19.1-3 Transit Time Current and Duration for a Single Carrier Pair. Referring to Fig. 19.1-6,
assume that a photon generates an electron-hole pair at the position x = w/3, that v. = Змь,
and that the carriers recombine at the contacts. For each carrier in the semiconductor, find
the magnitudes of the currents, 7; and 1., and the durations of the currents, т» and те.
Express your results in terms of e, w, and v,. Verify that the total charge induced in the
circuit is е. For ve = 6 x 10° cm/s and w = 10 ит, sketch the time course of 4 (1), ic(t),
and i(t).

*19.1-4 Transit-Time Spread for a Uniformly Illuminated Semiconductor Photodetector. Con-
sider a semiconductor material (as in Fig. 19.1-6) exposed to a broad-area impulse of light
at $ = 0 that uniformly generates N electron-hole pairs between 0 and w. Let the electron
and hole velocities in the material be v. and м», respectively. Show that the hole current can
be written as

2
. foe <<"
in(t) = w? w Va
0, elsewhere,
and that the electron current can be written as
Nev? Nev. w
. —-—,- t+ —., 0<t<—
ie(t) = и? и Ve
0, elsewhere,
so that the total current is
Ne 1,4 2 w
и [+ о. 051).
i(t) =
Mew м, Ши.
и и Ve Va
These three currents are illustrated in Fig. 19.1-7. Verify that the electrons and holes each
contribute charge Ne/2 to the external circuit so that the total charge delivered to the circuit
is Ne.

*19.1-5 Two-Photon Photodetectors. Consider a beam of photons of energy hy and photon-flux
density ф (photons/cm?-s) incident on a semiconductor detector with bandgap energy hy <
E, < 2hy, so that one photon has insufficient energy to raise an electron from the valence to
the conduction band. However, two photons can occasionally conspire to jointly surrender
their energy to the electron. Assume that the current density induced in such a detector
is J, = ($2, where © is a constant. Show that the responsivity (A/W) of the two-photon
photodetector is given by В = [¢/(hc,)?]A2P/A, where P is the optical power and A is the
illuminated detector area. Provide a rationale for the proportionality of В to Л? and Р/А.
Two-photon photoemission behaves similarly.*

19.2-1 Photoconductive Detector Circuit. A photoconductive detector is often connected in series
with a load resistor А and a DC voltage source У, and the voltage У, across the load resistor
is measured. If the conductance of the detector is proportional to the optical power P, sketch
the dependence of V, on P. Under what conditions is this dependence linear?

19.2-2 Photoconductivity in Intrinsic Si. The concentration of charge carriers in a sample of
intrinsic Si is п; = 1.5 x 100 cm~® and the recombination lifetime т = 10 ps. If the
material is illuminated with light, and an optical power density of 1 mW/cm? at A, = 1 ит
is absorbed by the material, determine the percentage increase in its conductivity. Assume
that the quantum efficiency 7 = 1/2.

1 See М. С. Teich, J. М. Schréer, and С. J. Wolga, Double-Quantum Photoelectric Emission from Sodium

Metal, Physical Review Letters, vol. 13, pp. 611-614, 1964.

940 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS

19.3-1 Quantum Efficiency and Responsivity of a Photodiode Detector. A particular p—i—n pho-
todiode illuminated by a pulse of light containing 6 x 101? incident photons at a wavelength
of Л, = 1550 nm gives rise, on average, to 2 x 10!” electrons collected at the terminals of
the device. Determine the quantum efficiency 7] and the responsivity К of the photodiode at
this wavelength.

19.4-1 Quantum Efficiency of an APD. An APD with gain G = 20 operates at a wavelength
Ло = 1550 nm. If its responsivity at this wavelength is К = 12 A/W, calculate its quantum
efficiency 7. What is the photocurrent i, at the output of the device if a photon flux = 1010
photons/s, at this same wavelength, is incident on it?

19.4-2 Gain of a Ge APD. Show that a conventional APD with ionization ratio К = 1, such as
a device fabricated from germanium, has а gain given by G = 1/(1 — aw), where ag is
the electron ionization coefficient and w is the width of the multiplication layer. Note that
(19.4-8) cannot be used to provide a proper result for the gain when k = 1.

19.6-1_ Comparison of Excess Noise Factors for SCISCM and SCIDCM Conventional APDs.

Show that a single-carrier-injection single-carrier-multiplication (SCISCM) conventional

APD with pure electron injection and no hole multiplication (k = 0) has an excess noise

factor Е © 2 for all appreciable values of the gain. Use (19.4-8) to show that the mean gain

is then G = exp(a,w). Calculate the responsivity of a Si APD illuminated by photons of

energy equal to its bandgap energy, Е’, = 1.12 eV, assuming that 7 = 0.8 and G = 70.

Determine the excess noise factor for a single-carrier-injection double-carrier-multiplication

(SCIDCM) Si APD when К = 0.01. Compare the SCISCM and SCIDCM results for Г.

*19.6-2 Mean Gain of a Staircase APD. Use the Bernoulli probability law to demonstrate that the
mean gain of a single-carrier-injection single-carrier-multiplication (SCISCM) multilayer
APD, such as the staircase device displayed in Fig. 19.6-6, is G = (1 + P)™, where Р is
the probability of impact ionization at each stage and № is the number of stages. Show that
С reduces to the result for the conventional SCISCM APD when Р -> 0 and N -> oo. In
this limit there are an infinite number of stages and the probability is vanishingly small that
a carrier is produced by impact ionization in any one given stage of the device.

19.6-3 Excess Noise Factor for a Photomultiplier Tube.

(a) Derive an expression for the excess noise factor ЕЁ of a one-stage photomultiplier tube
(PMT) assuming that the number of secondary-emission electrons per incident primary
electron is Poisson distributed with mean 6. Show that the results are a special case of
those provided in (19.6-26) for the N-dynode PMT.

(b) When the N dynodes are all identical (A = 1), in the limit of high mean gain (G > 1),
show that (19.6-26) can be written as F = a’ (ai —1) = 6/(6 — 1). This
signifies that the gain provided by a PMT is nearly noise free even without the benefit
of a high-gain first dynode.

*19.6-4 Excess Noise Factor for a Photoconductive Detector. The gain of a photoconductive
detector was specified in (19.2-3) to be G = т/ть, where т is the excess-carrier electron—
hole recombination lifetime and 7, is the electron transit time across the sample. In a more
realistic representation, the gain G is taken to be a random quantity since the process of
electron-hole recombination is random. Show that an exponentially distributed probability
density function for the random recombination lifetime, Р(т) = (1/7) exp(—7/7), results
in an excess noise factor F = 2. In accordance with (19.6-25), this reveals that photocon-
ductor generation-recombination (GR) noise degrades the photoconductor current SNR
by a factor of 2.

19.6-5 Bandwidth of an RC Circuit. Using the definition of bandwidth provided in (19.6-16),
show that a circuit of impulse response function h(t) = (е/т) exp(—t/7) has a bandwidth
В = 1/4r. What is the bandwidth of an RC circuit? Determine the thermal noise current
associated with a resistance В = 1kQ at T = 300° К connected to a capacitance C' = 5 pF.

19.6-6 Signal-to-Noise Ratio for an Analog APD Receiver. Assuming that circuit noise is neg-
ligible, by what factor does the signal-to-noise ratio of a receiver that uses a conventional
APD of mean gain G = 100 change if the ionization ratio k is increased from k = 0.1 to
К = 0.2? Show that if G >> 1 and G >» 2(1 — k)/k, the SNR is approximately inversely
proportional to G.

19.6-7 Noise in an Analog APD Receiver. An optical receiver using a conventional APD has the
following parameters: quantum efficiency 7 = 0.8; mean gain G = 100; ionization ratio

PROBLEMS 941
К = 0.5; load resistance Ry = 1 КО; temperature T = 300° К; bandwidth В = 100 kHz;
and dark/leakage current 7g = 1 nA. An optical signal of power 10 nW at A, = 0.87 jum is
received. Determine the RMS values of the different noise currents, and the SNR. Assume
that the dark/leakage current has a noise variance that obeys the same law as photocurrent
noise and that the receiver is resistance limited.

19.6-8 Optimal Gain for an APD in an Analog Receiver. An analog receiver using а рп
photodiode has a ratio of circuit-noise variance to photoelectron-noise variance of 100. If
a conventional APD with ionization ratio k = 0.2 is used instead, determine the optimal
mean gain for maximizing the SNR and the corresponding improvement in SNR.

19.6-9 Analog Receiver Sensitivity. Determine the receiver sensitivity, in terms of the optical
power required to achieve a SNR = 10°, for a photodetector of quantum efficiency 7 = 0.8
at Ло = 1300 nm in a circuit of bandwidth В = 100 MHz when there is no circuit noise.
The receiver measures the electric current 2.

19.6-10 Noise Comparison for Three Photodetectors. Consider a photodetector connected in se-
ries with a 50-0 load resistor maintained at 77° К (liquid-nitrogen temperature) that is to
be used in a 1-zm-wavelength analog optical system with a bandwidth of 1 GHz. Compare
the performance of three photodetectors: 1) а p-i—n photodiode with quantum efficiency
7 = 0.9; 2) an APD with quantum efficiency 7 = 0.6, gain G = 100, and ionization ratio
k = 0; and 3) a 10-stage photomultiplier tube (PMT) with quantum efficiency 7 = 0.3,
overall mean gain G = 410, and overall gain variance a2, = Гео /4.

(a) For each photodetector, determine the photocurrent SNR when it is illuminated by a
photon flux of 1010 s~!.

(b) Which devices render the signal detectable?

*19.6-11 Sensitivity of an AM Receiver. A receiver with negligible circuit noise, bandwidth B, and
a photodetector with responsivity R (A/W) measures a modulated optical power P(t) =
Po + P,cos(2aft), where f < В. If Po >» Ps, derive an expression for the minimum
modulation power P,, that is measurable with signal-to-noise ratio SNRo = 30 dB. What is
the effect of the background power Ро on the minimum observable signal P,,?

19.6-12 Dependence of Digital Receiver Sensitivity on Wavelength. The receiver sensitivity of
an ideal digital receiver (with unity quantum efficiency and no circuit noise) operating at
a wavelength 870 nm is —76 dBm. What is the sensitivity at 1300 nm if the receiver is
operated at the same data rate?

19.6-13 Bit Error Rate for a Digital Receiver. An ideal digital receiver that makes use of a p—i—n
photodiode with 7 = 1 is devoid of noise except for Poisson photon noise. The receiver
mistakes a 870-nm optical signal of power P (logic state “1”) that is present for one that is
absent (logic state “0”) with probability 10-10. What is the probability of error under each
of the following altered conditions?

(a) The wavelength is A, = 1300 nm.

(b) Original conditions, but now the power is doubled.

(c) Original conditions, but the photodetector quantum efficiency is now 7 = 0.5.

(d) Original conditions, but an ideal APD with 7 = 1, gain G = 100, and F = 1 (no gain
noise) is used.

(e) As in (d), but the APD has an excess noise factor Р = 2 instead.

19.6-14 Sensitivity of a Photon-Counting Receiver. A photodetector with quantum efficiency 7 =
0.5 records the number of photoelectrons received in successive time intervals of duration
Т =1 us. Determine the receiver sensitivity (mean number of photons required to achieve
a SNR = 103) assuming that the photon-number distribution is Poisson. Assuming that the
wavelength of the light is A, = 870 nm, what is the corresponding optical power? If this
optical power is detected, what is the probability that the detector registers zero counts?

*19.6-15 Single-Dynode PMT Illuminated by Photon-Number-Squeezed Light. Consider a pho-
tomultiplier tube (PMT) with quantum efficiency 7 and a single dynode. Incident on the
photocathode is light from a specially designed photon source for which the probability of
observing п photons in the counting time T is

12, n=0,1
p(n) = ,
0, otherwise.

942 CHAPTER 19 PHOTODETECTORS
When an electron strikes the dynode, either two or three secondary electrons are emitted
and these proceed to the anode to be registered. The gain distribution P(G) is given by
13, G=2
P(G)=¢ 23, G=3
0, otherwise,

so that it is twice as likely that three secondary electrons are produced as two.

(a) Calculate the SNR and the photon-number variance-to-mean ratio for the input photon
number and compare these quantities to those for a Poisson photon number of the same
mean.

(b) Find the probability distribution for the photoelectron number р( т), along with its SNR
and variance-to-mean ratio [see Sec. 13.2D].

(с) Demonstrate that as the quantum efficiency 7 decreases and approaches zero, the
photoelectron-number variance-to-mean ratio o,?/m approaches unity from below, but
never becomes equal to or exceeds unity.’ The photoelectron statistics thus retain their
sub-Poisson character no matter how small 7 becomes.

(d) Determine the mean gain (С) and the mean-square gain (С?) associated with the
secondary-emission process.

(e) Find the excess noise factor РГ.

(f) Assuming that the quantum efficiency of the PMT is 7 = 1/4, and the counting time
Т = 1.3 ns, determine the mean anode current 7 in a circuit of bandwidth В = 1 / 2T,
and calculate the current SNR.

(g) Calculate the PMT responsivity if the incident light is of wavelength Л. = 1550 nm.

(h) Explain why (19.6-23) for д? is not applicable.

1 See М. С. Teich and В. Е. А. Saleh, Effects of Random Deletion and Additive Noise on Bunched and
Antibunched Photon-Counting Statistics, Optics Letters, vol. 7, pp. 365-367, 1982.

CHAPTER
ee
ACOUSTO-OPTICS
20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND 945

A. Bragg Diffraction
*В. Coupled-Wave Theory
C. Bragg Diffraction of Beams
20.2 ACOUSTO-OPTIC DEVICES 958
A. Modulators
B. Scanners
C. Space Switches
D. Filters, Frequency Shifters, and Isolators
*20.3 ACOUSTO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 967
£ %
р
a eA tae
Sir William Henry Bragg (1862-1942, left) and Sir William Lawrence Bragg (1890-1971, right),
a father-and-son team, were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1915 for their studies of the diffraction of
light from periodic structures such as those created by sound.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
943

CSC
The refractive index of an optical medium can be altered by the presence of sound.
Acousto-optics is the study of how sound modifies the effect such a medium has on
light, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 20.0-1. Many useful photonic devices make
use of the ability of sound to control light; these include optical modulators, switches,
deflectors, filters, isolators, frequency shifters, and spectrum analyzers.
Light Sound
—
| ЗЕ Figure 20.0-1 Sound can modify the
ВОИ) effect of an optical medium on light.
Mediumes [7
Sound is a dynamic strain involving molecular vibrations that takes the form of a
wave traveling at a velocity characteristic of the medium (the velocity of sound). As an
example, a harmonic plane wave of compressions and rarefactions in a gas is depicted
in Fig. 20.0-2. In those regions where the medium is compressed, the density of gas is
higher and its refractive index is larger; where the medium is rarefied, its density and
refractive index are smaller. In solids, sound involves vibrations of the molecules about
their equilibrium positions; this alters the optical polarizability of the material and thus
its refractive index.
; *t *
Rare factiOn неон
Compression es |< Figure 20.0-2 Variation of the refractive
index of a material accompanying a harmonic
в т + sound wave. The pattern has a period A (the
А И am wavelength of sound) and travels with the
[— > + velocity of sound in the medium.
———
Refractive index
Hence, an acoustic wave creates a perturbation of the refractive index in the form of
a wave. The medium becomes a dynamic graded-index medium — an inhomogeneous
medium with a time-varying, stratified refractive index. The theory of acousto-optics
deals with the perturbation of the refractive index caused by sound, and with the
propagation of light through this perturbed, time-varying, inhomogeneous medium.
The propagation of light in static (as opposed to time-varying) inhomogeneous
(graded-index) media has been examined in Secs. 1.3, 2.4C, and 5.2B. Since opti-
cal frequencies are far higher than acoustic frequencies, the variations of the refrac-
tive index in a medium perturbed by sound are invariably very slow in comparison
with the optical period. As a consequence, an adiabatic approach is suitable wherein
the optical propagation problem is solved separately at every instant of time during
the relatively slow course of the acoustic cycle, always treating the material as if it
were a Static (frozen) inhomogeneous medium. In this quasi-stationary approximation,
acousto-optics reduces to the optics of inhomogeneous media, usually periodic, con-
trolled by sound.
944

20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND 945
The simplest form of the interaction of light and sound is the partial reflection of an
optical plane wave from the stratified parallel planes representing the refractive-index
variations created by an acoustic plane wave (Fig. 20.0-3). A set of parallel reflectors
separated by the wavelength of sound A will reflect light if the angle of incidence 9
satisfies the Bragg condition for constructive interference (2.5-13),
. А
зш дз = 5, (20.0-1)
2 Bragg Condition
where Л is the wavelength of light in the medium [Exercise 2.5-3 and (7.1-42)]. This
form of light-sound interaction is known as Bragg diffraction, Bragg reflection, or
Bragg scattering. Devices that make use of it are known as Bragg reflectors, Bragg
deflectors, Bragg cells, acousto-optic cells, or acousto-optic modulators.
Diffracted light
Incident light
— —” Figure 20.0-3 Bragg diffraction: an
— acoustic plane wave acts as a partial
o[ 7 —_1t_, reflector of light (a beamsplitter) when
—= the angle of incidence 9 satisfies the
at RR Bragg condition specified in (20.0-1).
Sound _ Transmitted
light
This Chapter
In Sec. 20.1, a simplified theory of the optics of Bragg diffraction is presented for lin-
ear, nondispersive, and isotropic media. Though the theory is based on wave optics, so
that the polarization of light and sound are ignored, a simple quantum interpretation of
the interaction emerges. Bragg cells using electrically controlled acoustic transducers
have found widespread application in photonics and their use for the modulation and
scanning of light is considered in Sec. 20.2. Section 20.3 provides a brief introduction
to anisotropic and polarization effects in acousto-optics.
20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND
The effect of a scalar acoustic wave on a scalar optical wave is described in this section.
We first consider optical and acoustic plane waves, and then examine the interaction of
optical and acoustic beams.
A. Bragg Diffraction
Consider an acoustic plane wave of frequency f (angular frequency 2 = 27) and
wavelength A = v,/f (wavenumber а = 2” /Л) traveling in the x direction (vertically)

946 — СНАРТЕВ20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
in a medium with sound velocity v,. The strain (relative displacement) at time ¢ and
position x in the medium is

s(a,t) = 50 cos(Qt — 4х), (20.1-1)
where So is the strain amplitude. The acoustic intensity Г; (units of W/ п?) is

2
I, = 10535), (20.1-2)

where 0 is the mass density of the medium.

Refractive-index perturbation. The medium is assumed to be optically trans-
parent and its refractive index in the absence of sound is n. The sound-induced strain
s(a,t) creates a proportional perturbation of the refractive index that is obtained via а
Taylor-series expansion analogous to that used for the Pockels effect in (21.1-4),

An(z,t) = —4pn*s(z, t), (20.1-3)
where p is a dimensionless phenomenological coefficient known as the elasto-optic
coefficient or strain-optic coefficient. The minus sign indicates that positive strain
(dilation) leads to a reduction of the refractive index. As a consequence, the medium
has a time-varying inhomogeneous refractive index that takes the form of a wave

n(x, t) =n — Ато cos(Qt — gz), (20.1-4)
with amplitude
Ang = $pn’ Sp. (20.1-5)
Substituting (20.1-2) into (20.1-5) reveals that the refractive-index change is propor-
tional to the square root of the acoustic intensity,
Ano = \/5MIs. (20.1-6)
The quantity
26
n
m= Pe (20.1-7)
QUs Acousto-Optic
Figure of Merit
is a material parameter that represents the effectiveness of sound in altering the refrac-
tive index. The quantity JM is thus a figure of merit that indicates the strength of the
acousto-optic effect in the material.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 20.1-1. Acousto-Optic Figure of Merit for Flint С!а$$. Extra-dense flint
glass is characterized by the parameters о = 6.3 x 103 kg/m*, Us = 3.1 km/s, n = 1.92, and
р = 0.25, so that М = 1.67 x 10-М m?/W. An acoustic wave of intensity 10 W/cm? thus creates
a refractive-index wave of amplitude Ang = 2.89 x 10-5.

20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND 947

Amplitude reflectance. Consider now an optical plane wave traveling in this
medium with frequency и, angular frequency w = 2ти, free-space wavelength Ло =
Co/V, wavelength in the unperturbed medium А = Ло/п corresponding to wavenumber
К = nw/Co, and wavevector К lying in the z—z plane and making an angle 9 with the
z axis, as illustrated in Fig. 20.1-1.

k 0 k
L т _ [—_ _—_| 9 [2 __
а о == |
ыы
0 —--- Е —
И \ <
д о ой
И a |
2
Lsind” “Lsin0
Figure 20.1-1 Reflections from layers of an inhomogeneous medium.
Because the acoustic frequency f is typically smaller than the optical frequency и by
at least five orders of magnitude, we consider the light-sound interaction in terms of
an adiabatic approach, as mentioned earlier. Hence, the refractive index is taken to be
a Static “frozen” sinusoidal function
п(х) = п — Ang с03(45 — $), (20.1-8)
where ф is а fixed phase. We determine the reflected light from this inhomogeneous
(graded-index) medium and track its slow variation with time by taking ф = 0+.

To determine the amplitude of the reflected wave (wavevector k,.) we divide the
medium into incremental planar layers orthogonal to the x axis. The incident optical
plane wave is partially reflected at each layer because of the refractive-index change. To
begin, we assume that the reflectance is sufficiently small so that the transmitted light
from each layer approximately maintains its original magnitude (i.e., is not depleted)
as it penetrates through the subsequent layers of the medium.

If Ar = (4/42) Az is the incremental complex amplitude reflectance of a layer
of incremental width Az at position x, the total complex amplitude reflectance for an
overall length Г, (Fig. 20.1-1) is the sum of all incremental reflectances,

1 ecg at
T= ] ет т — dy, (20.1-9)
—L/2 dx
The phase factor e/?***"? accommodates the fact that the reflected wave at a position
x is advanced by a distance 2% sin 9, corresponding to a phase shift 2k sin 6, relative
to the reflected wave at x = 0. The wavenumbers of the incident and reflected waves
are taken to be the same.

Using (20.1-8), we write

dr фт ar

— = — ~~ — gAnosi —y), 20.1-10

da dn dn dn no sina — $) ( )
where the derivative dr/dn, which may be obtained from the Fresnel equations of
reflection as will be shown subsequently, is not dependent on x. Substituting (20.1-10)

948 CHAPTER 20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
into (20.1-9), and using complex notation for sin(gx —p) = [е7 97-9) —е 7-9] /23,
we have
51 ab
т = ое 1 ] ет 9) day — те IP ] ет 9-4) р, (20.1-11)
ар 1
where
1 dr
то = 5Ano gl —. (20.1-12)
dn
Carrying out the integrals in (20.1-11) and substituting ф = Ot, we finally obtain
т=т т, (20.1-13)
where
т+ = +jro sinc (2k sin? = az| etInt (20.1-14)
2n Amplitude Reflectance
and sinc(x) = sin(7x)/(72).

For reasons that will become clear shortly, the terms т, and r_ are called the
upshifted and downshifted Bragg amplitude reflectances, respectively. The upshifted
reflectance т. has its maximum value when 2ksin@ = 4, whereas the downshifted
reflection is maximum when 2k sin? = —q. If L is sufficiently large, these maxima
are sharp, so that any slight deviation from the angles 9 = + sin~'(q/2k) renders the
corresponding term negligible. Thus, only one of these two terms can be significant at a
time, depending on the angle @. We first consider the upshifted condition, 2k sin 0 = q,
in which case the downshifted reflection is negligible; we comment on the downshifted
case subsequently.

Bragg Condition
The sinc function in (20.1-14) attains its maximum value of 1.0 when its argument is
zero, 1.е., when g = 2k sin 6 for upshifted reflection. This occurs when 6 = 6-3, where
63 = sin '(q/2k) is the Bragg angle. Since а = 277/A and k = 27/2, we have
. А
зш в = Эл: (20.1-15)
2 Bragg Angle

The Bragg angle is the angle at which the incremental reflections from planes separated
by an acoustic wavelength A have a phase shift of 27 so that they interfere construc-
tively [see Exercise 2.5-3 and (7.1-42)].
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 20.1-2. Bragg Angle for Flint Glass. Ап acousto-optic cell is made of extra-
dense flint glass of refractive index п, = 1.92, in which the velocity of sound is v, = 3.1 km/s. The
Bragg angle for reflection of an optical wave of free-space wavelength Л, = 633 nm (A = A,/n =
330 nm) from a sound wave of frequency f = 100 MHz (A = v;/f = 31 pm) is дз = 5.3 mrad =
0.30°. This angle is internal (i.e., inside the medium). If the cell is placed in air, 9з corresponds to
an external angle 05, = пб» = 0.59°. A sound wave of 10 times greater frequency (f = 1 GHz)
corresponds to a Bragg angle 63 = 3.0°.
ПОНИ

20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND 949
The Bragg condition can also be stated as a simple relation between the wavevectors
of the sound wave and the optical waves. а = (4,0,0), К = (—ksin 0,0, К соз 0),
and К, = (К sin 0, 0, К cos 0) represent the components of the wavevectors of the sound
wave, the incident light wave, and the reflected light wave, respectively, the condition
q = 2ksin @g is equivalent to the vector relation
К, =k+4q, (20.1-16)
Bragg Condition
as illustrated by the vector diagram in Fig. 20.1-2.
Incident Diffracted ‘
light — light \
— — a” ky 1
И 18 127
A + — son I I
т — A м /
а Sound и
Figure 20.1-2 The Bragg condition sin 63 = q/2k is equivalent to the vector relation k, = k+q.
For a sound wave traveling in the upward direction, the directions of the incident optical wave and
the sound wave form an acute angle and the frequency of the diffracted wave is upshifted.
Tolerance in the Bragg Condition
The dependence of the complex amplitude reflectance on the angle 0 is governed by the
symmetric function зшс[(9 — 2k sin @)L/27]| = sinc[(sin 0 — sin )2L/A] in (20.1-
14). This function reaches its peak value when 6 = 6 and drops sharply when 0 differs
slightly from 03. When sin 6 — зп 9з = »/2L the sinc function reaches its first zero
and the intensity reflectance |r|? vanishes (Fig. 20.1-3). Because 6g is usually very
small, sin @ = 9, and the reflectance vanishes at an angular deviation from the Bragg
angle of approximately 6 — 6g = Л/2Г. Since Г, is typically much greater than Л,
this is an extremely small angular width. This sharp reduction of the reflectance for
slight deviations from the Bragg angle occurs as a result of the destructive interference
between the incremental reflections from the sound wave.
Incident Diffracted
— = _—” =
Е
9 | “| \ 0 3
— = —||-— A
Е la ii 2L
|= |
1 — р р
— Sound 0 Og 0
Figure 20.1-3 Dependence of the intensity reflectance |r|? on the angle 0. Maximum reflection
occurs at the Bragg angle 3 = sin” '(\/2A).

950 CHAPTER 20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
Doppler Shift
In accordance with (20.1-14), the complex amplitude reflectance r, is proportional to
exp(jQt). Since the angular frequency of the incident light is w [i.e., Е сх exp(jwt)],
the reflected wave Е, = r,E сх exp|j(w + О) has angular frequency
wp =ш +0. (20.1-17)
Doppler Shift
The process of reflection is therefore accompanied by a frequency shift equal to the
frequency of the sound. This can be viewed as a Doppler shift (Exercise 2.6-1 and
Sec. 14.3D). The incident light is reflected from surfaces that move with velocity vg. Its
Doppler-shifted angular frequency is therefore w, = w(1+2v, sin @/c), where v, sin 0
is the component of velocity of these surfaces along the direction of the incident and
reflected waves. Using the relations sin? = A/2A, vs = ЛО/2т, and с = №/2п
reproduces (20.1-17). The magnitude of the Doppler shift equals the sound frequency.
Because 2. < w, the frequencies of the incident and reflected waves are approxi-
mately equal (the difference is typically smaller than 1 part in 10°) so that the wave-
lengths of the two waves are therefore also approximately equal. In writing (20.1-9)
we have implicitly made use of this assumption by using the same wavenumber k for
the two waves. Also, in drawing the vector diagram in Fig. 20.1-2 it was assumed that
the vectors k, and К have approximately the same length, nw/co.
Intensity Reflectance
The reflectance R = |r|? is the ratio of the intensity of the reflected optical wave to
that of the incident optical wave. At the Bragg angle 0 = 0, (20.1-14) gives R = |ro|?
so that substituting from (20.1-12) yields
Ви ат |9" |" 20.1-18
=1Ата т. (20.1-18)
An expression for the derivative dr/dn may be obtained by use of the Fresnel
equations (Sec. 6.2) to determine the incremental complex-amplitude reflectance Ar
in terms of the incremental refractive-index change An between two adjacent layers.
For TE (orthogonal) polarization, (6.2-8) is used with ny = п + An, nog = п, and
9: = 90° — 9; Snell’s law пл sin 0: = п2 sin 62 provides 05. When terms of second
order in An are neglected, the result is Ат = —An/2n sin? 0 so that
dr —1
а. 20.1-19
dn 2nsin? 0 ( )
Equation (6.2-9) is similarly used for the TM (parallel) polarization, yielding
Г —cos20
а. 20.1-20
dn 2nsin? 0 ( )
In most acousto-optic devices 6 is very small, so that cos 20 = 1, rendering (20.1-19)
approximately applicable for both polarizations.
Substituting (20.1-19) into (20.1-18), and using the Bragg condition 4 = 2k sin@ =
(47n sin 9 /Ло), then leads to
п? Г \?
R= ~~ (| — | Ат. 20.1-21
А? (5) "0 ( )

20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND 9951
Using (20.1-6), we conclude that the intensity reflectance
2 2
п Г,
= (sag ) MI, (20.1-22)
2№ \sind Intensity
Reflectance
is proportional to the intensity of the acoustic wave I,, to the material parameter М
defined in (20.1-7), and to the square of the oblique distance Г, / sin 6 of penetration
of light through the acoustic wave. Finally, substituting эт 0 = \/2A into (20.1-22)
gives rise to
L? А2
R = 2 MIs. (20.1-23)
о
Hence, the intensity reflectance is inversely proportional to \4 (or directly proportional
to w4). The dependence of the efficiency of scattering on the fourth power of the optical
frequency is typical for light-scattering phenomena (see Secs. 5.6B, 10.3A, and 14.5С).
The purported proportionality between the reflectance and the sound intensity is
problematical, however. As the sound intensity increases, R would eventually exceed
unity, and the reflected light would be more intense than the incident light. This result
is a consequence of a violation of the assumptions of this approximate theory. It was
assumed at the outset that the incremental reflection from each layer was too small to
deplete the transmitted wave that reflects from subsequent layers. Clearly, this assump-
tion does not hold when the sound wave is intense. Saturation then occurs, ensuring that
R does not exceed unity (see also Sec. 7.1C). As will be shown in Sec. 20.1B, a more
careful analysis that accommodates depletion of the incident optical wave leads to an
expression for the exact reflectance Х. given by
where ХХ is the approximate reflectance provided in (20.1-22). Evidently, when Х < 1,
sin УХ = VR, so that Х. = R, as illustrated in Fig. 20.1-4.
& R/
8 y Figure 20.1-4 Dependence of the exact re-
Е flectance Х. of a Bragg reflector on the intensity
3 of sound J,. When J, is small R. = R, which is a
2 linear function of J,.

% Sound intensity /,
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 20.1-3. Reflectance of a Flint-Glass Bragg Cell. Consider a Bragg cell made
of extra-dense flint glass, which has a figure of merit М = 1.67 x 10-\ m?/W (Example 20.1-
1). For A, = 633 nm (a wavelength of the He-Ne laser), a sound intensity J, = 10 W/cm’, and a
penetration length of the light through the sound L/sin@ = 1 mm, we find that R = 0.0206 and
ХФ. = 0.0205, so that approximately 2% of the light is reflected from the cell. If the sound intensity
is increased to 100 W/ em’, however, then Х = 0.206 and R, = 0.192, revealing that the depletion
of the incident optical wave must be accommodated and that the reflectance increases to == 19%.
«И

952 — СНАРТЕВ20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
Downshifted Bragg Diffraction
According to (20.1-14), another possible geometry for Bragg diffraction is that for
which 2ksin@ = —9. This is satisfied when the angle 9 is negative; i.e., when the
directions of the incident optical wave and the sound wave make an obtuse angle,
as illustrated in Fig. 20.1-5. In this case, the downshifted reflectance r_ in (20.1-
14) attains its maximum value, while the upshifted reflectance r+ is negligible. The
complex amplitude reflectance is then
r= —jroe ИИ. (20.1-25)
In this geometry, the frequency of the reflected optical wave, denoted w,, is down-
shifted, so that
Ws =w-D (20.1-26)
and the wavevectors of the light and sound waves satisfy the relation
К, =К-а, (20.1-27)
as illustrated in Fig. 20.1-5. Equation (20.1-27) is а phase-matching condition, en-
suring that the light reflections add in phase. The frequency downshift in (20.1-26) is
consistent with the Doppler shift since the light and its parallel sound-wave component
travel in the same direction in this configuration.
*t ‘
Transmitted light \
= a 47
= -q|'
ent 6 9 12
| ' SS Ks : |
_ А — — `2т р =
Incident light т — NL /
— Sound _ Diffracted light р
Figure 20.1-5 Geometry of downshifted diffraction of light from a sound wave traveling in the
upward direction. The directions of the incident optical wave and the sound wave make an obtuse
angle with respect to each other and the frequency of the diffracted wave is downshifted.
Quantum Interpretation
In accordance with the quantum theory of light (Chapter 13), an optical wave of angular
frequency w and wavevector k is viewed as a stream of photons, each of energy hw and
momentum hk. An acoustic wave of angular frequency 2 and wavevector q may be
similarly regarded as a stream of acoustic quanta, called phonons, each of energy hQ
and momentum fiq.

From a quantum perspective, the interaction of light and sound involves a photon
and a phonon combining to generate a new photon with the sum energy and mo-
mentum. An incident photon of frequency w and wavevector k thus interacts with a
phonon of frequency Q and wavevector а to generate a new photon of frequency ил.
and wavevector k,., as illustrated in Fig. 20.1-6 (see also Fig. 14.5-5). Conservation
of energy and momentum require that iw, = hw + ЙО and hk, = hk + hq, from
which the Doppler shift formula (20.1-17), и, = w+ ©, and the Bragg condition

20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND 953
(20.1-16), К, = К - а, are recovered. The preceding argument is applicable for
upshifted Bragg diffraction; a parallel argument exists for the downshifted case. The
quantum interpretation provided here is similar to that offered for Brillouin and Raman
scattering in Sec. 14.5C.
Photon fiw 7 Photon fiw,.
ty. ayn Figure 20.1-6 Bragg diffraction from a quan-
A tum perspective: a photon combines with a phonon
Phonon hQ о to generate a new photon with modified frequency
< and momentum.
*B. Coupled-Wave Theory
Bragg Diffraction as a Scattering Process
As described in Sec. 5.2B, light propagating through a homogeneous medium with a
slowly varying inhomogeneous refractive-index perturbation An is described by the
wave equation (5.2-20),
1 OE
Ve —- = & -8, 20.1-28
с? Ot? ( )
where the radiation source
OP AP 02
$ = ар. — — рот a5 (An &) (20.1-29)
is proportional to the second derivative of the product An €. For Bragg diffraction the
perturbation An is created by a sound wave, so the scattering source is dependent on
both the acoustic field and the optical field €, which includes both the incident and
scattered fields. An approximate method for solving this scattering problem makes use
of the first Born approximation, which relies on the assumption that the scattering
source 5 is created by the incident field, rather than by the actual field. Once the
scattering source is known, the wave equation can be solved for the scattered field.
We assume that the incident optical field is a plane wave,
& = Re{Aexp|j(wt — k- r)]} (20.1-30)
and that the perturbation engendered by the acoustic wave is also a plane wave,
An = —Ang cos(Qt — а -г). (20.1-31)
Substituting these two equations into (20.1-29), and reordering the terms of the product
An ©, leads to
Ano 2 . 2 .
$=- > (к. Re {A exp|j(w,t — К, -г)] } + К Ве {Aexp[j(wst —k,-r)]}),
(20.1-32)
where ил. = “+ О, К, = К-+ 4, К, = w,/c; andw, =ш- О, К, = К- 4, К, = w/c.
The two sources of radiation, with frequencies w+ and wavevectors k+q, may emit
upshifted or downshifted Bragg-reflected plane waves. Upshifted reflection occurs if
the geometry of the experimental configuration is such that the magnitude of the vector

954 CHAPTER 20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS

К + q equals w,/c = w/c, as can easily be seen from the vector diagram in Fig. 20.1-
2. Downshifted reflection occurs if the vector К — а has magnitude w,/c = w/c,
as illustrated in Fig. 20.1-5. Clearly, these two conditions cannot be simultaneously
satisfied.

The foregoing analysis provides an independent proof for the Bragg condition and
Doppler-shift formula based on a scattering approach. Equation (20.1-32) confirms that
the intensity of the emitted light is proportional to w*, so that the efficiency of scattering
is inversely proportional to the fourth power of the wavelength. This analysis can be
pursued further to obtain an expression for the intensity reflectance by determining the
intensity of the wave emitted by the scattering source (Prob. 20. 1-2).
Coupled-Wave Equations
To reach beyond the first Born approximation, we must include the contribution made
by the scattered field to the source 8. Assuming that the geometry is that of upshifted
Bragg diffraction, the field € then comprises the incident and Bragg-reflected waves:
& = Re{EFexp(jwt)} + Re{E, exp(jw,t)}. With the help of the relation An =
—Ang cos(Qt — а -г), (20.1-29) provides

$ = Re{Sexp(jwt) + S, exp(jw,t) } + terms of other frequencies, — (20.1-33)
where
A A
Ар, ре р, (20.1-34)
n n
Comparing terms of equal frequencies on both sides of the wave equation (20.1-28)
leads to a pair of coupled Helmholtz equations for the incident wave and the Bragg-
reflected wave:
(W+R)E=-S, (VW +k)E,=—S,. (20.1-35)
These equations, with the help of (20.1-34), may be solved to determine Е and E,.

Consider, as an example, the case of small-angle Bragg diffraction (9 < 1), so
that the two waves travel approximately in the z direction as portrayed in Fig. 20.1-7.
Assuming that К = k,, the fields Е and E, are described Бу Е = Aexp(—jkz) and
Е, = A, exp(—jkz), respectively, where the envelopes A and A, are slowly varying
functions of z. Using the slowly varying envelope approximation set forth in Sec. 2.2C,
we can set (V? + k?)Aexp(—jkz) = —j2k(dA/dz) exp(—jkz), whereupon (20. 1-
34) and (20.1-35) yield coupled first-order differential equations for the envelopes

dA
a = ДА, (20.1-Зба)
dz
dA, _.
aT = ЛА, (20.1-36b)
dz
with
A
y= koe (20.1-37)
n

20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND 955
Incident И" Reflected
пни ‘ Figure 20.1-7 Тор: Incident and reflected
——— waves for small-angle Bragg diffraction. Bottom:
ee The intensity of the incident optical wave decays
5 ee while that of the Bragg-reflected wave grows as
[4 ' ое” the distance of travel through the acoustic wave
° in the Bragg cell increases.
If the Bragg cell extends from z = 0 to z = d (Fig. 20.1-7), and we use the boundary
condition A,(0) = 0, (20.1-36) have the harmonic solutions
Vz
A(z) = A(0) cos() (20.1-38а)
. . (7
А, (2) = 1А(0) sin(+) . (20.1-38b)
These equations describe the growth of the reflected wave and the decay of the incident
wave, as illustrated in Fig. 20.1-7. The reflectance R, = |A,(d)|?/|A(0)|? is therefore
Re = sin?(yd/2), so that R. = sin? УХ, where R = (yd/2)?. Using (20.1-37), we
then have R = (л2/^?) 4? Anz, which exactly matches the expression for the weak-
sound reflectance provided in (20.1-21) with а = L/sin 0.
C. Bragg Diffraction of Beams
It has been shown thus far that an optical plane wave of wavevector k interacts with an
acoustic plane wave of wavevector q to produce an optical plane wave of wavevector
К. = К- а, provided that the Bragg condition is satisfied (1.е., the angle between К and
q is such that the magnitude k, = |k + q| = А = 27/), as illustrated in Fig. 20.1-2).
The interaction between a beam of light and a beam of sound can be understood if
the beams are regarded as superpositions of plane waves traveling in different direc-
tions, each with its own wavevector (see the introduction to Chapter 4).
Diffraction of an Optical Beam from an Acoustic Plane Wave
Consider an optical beam of width D interacting with an acoustic plane wave. In
accordance with Fourier optics (Sec. 4.3A), the optical beam can be decomposed into
a collection of plane waves whose directions occupy a cone of half-angle
60 = a (20.1-39)
=> .
The coefficient of proportionality in (20.1-39) is taken to be unity for simplicity, but
actually depends on the beam profile: 1) For a rectangular profile of width D, the
angular width from the peak to the first zero of the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern is
50 = X/D in accordance with (4.3-7); 2) For a circular profile of diameter D, 60 =
1.22\/D in accordance with (4.3-9); and 3) For a Gaussian beam of waist diameter
D = 2Wo, 60 = A/tWo = (2/7)A/D = 0.64X/D in accordance with (3.1-20).
Though there is only a single wavevector q for the acoustic plane wave, there are
many wavevectors К (all of the same length 27/) within the cone of angle 60 for the

956 CHAPTER 20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
optical beam. As illustrated in Fig. 20.1-8, however, there is only one direction of k
for which the Bragg condition is satisfied. The diffracted optical wave thus has only a
single wavevector k,. and is therefore a plane wave.
Incident \
light — Diffracted \
J — light \
—. — ky |
er ats 9 ‘|
ral — ^ РО пни В
— К i
| eel и
— 90 7
Figure 20.1-8 Diffraction of an optical beam from an acoustic plane wave. There is only a single
plane-wave component of the incident light beam that satisfies the Bragg condition. The diffracted
light is therefore a plane wave.
Diffraction of an Optical Beam from an Acoustic Beam
Suppose now that the acoustic wave itself is a beam of width D,. If the sound fre-
quency is sufficiently high so that the wavelength is much smaller than the width of
the medium, sound propagates as an unguided (free-space) wave and has properties
analogous to those of light, and exhibits an angular divergence
A
60, = —. 20.1-40
"РТ. ( )
The sound beam thus comprises a collection of acoustic plane waves whose directions
lie within the divergence angle 00.. The Bragg diffraction of an optical beam from an
acoustic beam can be determined by identifying matching pairs of optical and acoustic
plane waves that satisfy the Bragg condition. The sum of the reflected waves constitutes
the reflected optical beam. There are many vectors К (all of the same length 2л /Л) and
many vectors q (all of the same length 27/A), but only those pairs of vectors that
result in isosceles triangles obeying the Bragg condition contribute, as illustrated in
Fig. 20.1-9.
/ Incident oleh 90 —-
light | о \ а
И И | I
sol —. all |
= — ae
— |
5, = sf, i
Ld /
Figure 20.1-9 Diffraction of an optical beam from an acoustic beam. There are many plane-wave
components of the incident light beam that satisfy the Bragg condition so the diffracted light is an
optical beam.
If the acoustic-beam divergence is greater than that of the optical-beam (00, >> 69),
and if the central directions of the two beams satisfy the Bragg condition, every incident
optical plane wave finds an acoustic match and the diffracted light beam has the same

20.1 INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND SOUND 957
angular divergence as the incident optical beam 60. The distribution of acoustic energy
in the sound beam can then be monitored as a function of direction by using a probe
light beam of much narrower divergence and measuring the diffracted light as the angle
of incidence is varied.

Diffraction of an Optical Plane Wave from a Thin Acoustic Beam:
Raman-Nath Diffraction
Since a thin acoustic beam comprises plane waves traveling in many directions, it can
diffract light at angles that are significantly different from the Bragg angle correspond-
ing to the beam’s principal direction. Consider, for example, the geometry of Fig. 20.1-
10 in which an incident optical plane wave impinges perpendicularly to the principal
direction of a thin acoustic beam. This configuration for the acousto-optic diffraction
of light by sound is known as Raman-Nath diffraction or Debye—Sears diffraction.
Diffracted
light k
Incident r
—> —> й k
0 =
~~! ~ | q
5
г]
Figure 20.1-10 Raman-Nath diffraction of light by sound. An optical plane wave normally
incident on a thin-beam acoustic traveling or standing wave is partially deflected into two directions,
at angles 6 = +A/A with respect to the direction of the incident wave.

As can be understood from the vector diagram provided in Fig. 20.1-10, the Bragg
condition is satisfied if the diffracted wavevector makes angles +0 with respect to the
direction of the incident optical wave, where the angle 0 is given by

9 А
зш = ==. 20.1-41
2 2A ( )
If @ is small, we have sin(@/2) = 6/2, which leads to
А
9 = —. 20.1-42
| |
The incident light is diffracted at the angles =9, whether the thin acoustic beam is
traveling upward or downward. For an acoustic standing-wave beam, the optical wave
is diffracted at both angles from both traveling-wave components that comprise the
standing wave.

The angle 9 = A/A is in fact the angle at which a diffraction grating of period
A diffracts an incident plane wave (Exercise 2.4-5). Indeed, the thin acoustic beam
serves to modulate the refractive index of the acousto-optic material, creating a pattern
of period A confined to a thin planar layer. The acousto-optic medium thus acts as a
thin diffraction grating.

958 CHAPTER 20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS

Such an acousto-optic phase grating also allows light to be diffracted into higher
orders, at angles +20,+30,..., as described by (2.4-12) and illustrated in Fig. 20.1-
11(а). Such higher-order diffracted waves can be interpreted via a generalized quantum
picture of the light-sound interaction portrayed in Fig. 20.1-6: an incident photon
combines with two phonons to form a photon of the second-order diffracted wave.
Conservation of momentum dictates that the diffracted beams then have wavevectors
k + 2q [one of these beams, k, = k + 24, is illustrated in Fig. 20.1-11(6)]; the second-
order diffracted light is concomitantly frequency shifted to w +2. The same approach
can be used to describe higher orders of diffraction.

Ds —| = mire
k;
LO \9 ‘\
Incident _ oa
—> > к
И
(а) (Б)
Figure 20.1-11 (а) A thin acoustic beam acts as a diffraction grating. (5) Conservation-of-
momentum diagram for second-order acousto-optic diffraction.
20.2 ACOUSTO-OPTIC DEVICES

The materials used for the fabrication of acousto-optic devices are generally chosen on
the basis of the figure of merit М = p?n°/ov? that characterizes the strength of the
acousto-optic effect, as provided in (20.1-7). In addition to the region of wavelength
transparency, key material parameters are the refractive index, mass density, sound
velocity, and elasto-optic coefficient. Commonly used materials in the visible and
near-IR include extra-dense flint glass (Examples 20.1-1, 20.1-2, and 20.1-3), fused
silica, crystalline quartz, and TeO2; in the mid-IR, Ge and chalcogenide glasses are
often used. Longitudinal acoustic waves are most commonly employed in such devices
because of their high diffraction efficiency, but transverse acoustic waves have the merit
that they offer polarization-independent operation in certain configurations. Integrated-
optic devices often rely on LiNbOs, which is piezoelectric so that it allows the genera-
tion of on-chip surface acoustic waves via surface-mounted metallic electrodes.

As discussed in this section, acousto-optic modulators are useful in a wide variety
of applications in photonics, including:

= Analog modulation of optical intensity

= Digital switching of optical intensity

= Scanning an optical beam

= Routing an optical beam to selected directions

= Spectral analysis of an acoustic beam

= Spectral filtering of an optical beam

= Shifting the frequency of an optical beam

= Serving as an optical isolator

20.2 ACOUSTO-OPTIC DEVICES 959
A. Modulators
The intensity of the light diffracted from a Bragg cell is proportional to the intensity of
the applied acoustic wave, provided that the latter is sufficiently weak [see (20.1-22)].
Using an electrically controlled acoustic transducer [Fig. 20.2-1(a)], the reflected light
intensity can thus be varied proportionally. Such a device, known as an acousto-optic
modulator (AOM), serves as a linear analog modulator of light.

As the acoustic intensity increases and saturation sets in, it is possible to attain
essentially unity reflectance (Fig. 20.1-4). The modulator can then serve as an acousto-
optic switch. As illustrated in Fig. 20.2-1(b), switching the sound ON and OFF results
in the reflected light being switched ON and OFF, while the transmitted light is con-
comitantly switched OFF and ON. Acousto-optic switches find use in Q switching and
cavity dumping for solid-state lasers, as well as in active mode-locking and laser-pulse
selection (Sec. 16.4), among other uses.

5 Е Е Е
a & 2 > 22 =e
4 t Е - t = t Е - t
ae
3 5 — 85 — Zé
& АТА Ра ES
t t > 1
(а) (b)
Figure 20.2-1 (a) An acousto-optic modulator that uses an electrically controlled piezoelectric
transducer. The intensity of the diffracted light is proportional to the intensity of the sound. (b) An
acousto-optic switch. The presence of sound causes the light to be reflected while its absence allows
the light to be transmitted.
Modulation Bandwidth
The bandwidth of the modulator is the maximum frequency at which it can efficiently
impart modulation to the diffracted light. When the amplitude of an acoustic wave of
frequency fo is varied as a function of time via amplitude modulation with a signal
of bandwidth B, the acoustic wave is no longer a single-frequency harmonic function;
it then has frequency components that lie within a band fp + В centered about the
frequency fo (Fig. 20.2-2). How does monochromatic light interact with this multifre-
quency acoustic wave and what is the maximum value of B that can be accommodated
by the acousto-optic modulator?
lia | В Figure 20.2-2 Sample waveform
| a 3 —-||_2B of an amplitude-modulated acoustic
UH | т signal and its spectrum.
` Ци 0 to f
When both the incident optical wave and the acoustic wave are plane waves, the
component of sound of frequency f corresponds to a Bragg angle
А fr А
ее = —— 20.2-1
2A Qu, 2g Л ( )

960 CHAPTER 20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
assuming that 9 is small. For a fixed angle of incidence 9, an incident monochromatic
optical plane wave of wavelength Л thus interacts with one and only one harmonic
component of the acoustic wave, i.e., the component with frequency } that satisfies
(20.2-1). This frequency corresponds to a wavenumber 4 = (27/v,)f, and the vector
diagram illustrated in Fig. 20.2-3 shows that the diffracted wave is then monochromatic
with frequency и + }. Though the acoustic wave is modulated, the diffracted optical
wave is not. Evidently, under this idealized condition the bandwidth of the modulator
is zero!
| 2
2 ee Ай
9 7
ian 7 ae il 2m f,

x |

А И ЗИ
Figure 20.2-3 Interaction of an optical plane wave with a modulated (multifrequency) acoustic
plane wave. Only one frequency component of the sound diffracts the light wave. The diffracted
wave is monochromatic and not modulated.

To achieve modulation with a bandwidth B, each of the acoustic frequency compo-
nents within the band fo = В must interact with the incident light wave. A situation
with more tolerance is evidently required. Suppose that the incident light is a beam
of width D and angular divergence 00 = /D and that the modulated sound wave is
planar. Each frequency component of the sound can then interact with the optical plane
wave that has the matching Bragg angle (Fig. 20.2-4).

Incident Diffracted м V+ fot+B
light — light \
nd — . a. 50 > V+ fo _ F
Г ра == | и
50 “SSS | и |
ЩЕ +
60 7 —
/
/
т /
Figure 20.2-4 Interaction of an optical beam of angular divergence 00 with acoustic plane waves
whose frequencies are confined to the band fp + В. There are many parallel а vectors of different
lengths; each matches a direction in the incident light beam.

As is clear from the figure, the frequency band fp + В is accommodated by ап

optical beam of angular divergence
27/v;)B А
00 = Qn/vs)B _ В. (20.2-2)
21 /А Us
The bandwidth of the modulator is therefore determined by
00 Us
В=ъ.— == 20.2-3
т, ( )

20.2 ACOUSTO-OPTIC DEVICES 961
which we write as
1 D
B= = where T=—. (20.2-4)
T Us Modulator
Bandwidth
The quantity T represents the transit time of the sound across the waist of the light
beam, a result that is readily understood since a time T is required to change the
amplitude of the sound wave at all points in the light-sound interaction region. The
bandwidth can therefore be increased by focusing the light beam to a smaller diameter.
НИ
EXERCISE 20.2-1
Parameters of Acousto-Optic Modulators. Determine the Bragg angle and maximum band-
width for the following acousto-optic modulators:
Modulator 1
Material: Fused silica (п, = 1.46, и, = 6 km/s)
Sound: Frequency f = 50 MHz
Light: He-Ne laser, wavelength Л, = 633 nm; angular divergence 90 = 1 mrad
Modulator 2
Material: Tellurium (n = 4.8, и, = 2.2 km/s)
Sound: Frequency f = 100 MHz
Light: COz laser, wavelength A, = 10.6 yum; beam width D = 1 mm
НИ
В. Зсаппег$
An acousto-optic cell can be used to scan light. The fundamental concept is based оп
the linear relation between the Bragg angle 0 and the sound frequency f expressed in
(20.2-1). The angle of deflection 26 is therefore given by
А
20 = —f, (20.2-5)
Us
where @ is taken to be sufficiently small so that sin? = 0. By changing the sound
frequency f, the deflection angle 20 can be varied.

Scanning with an acoustic plane wave. One difficulty is that 6 represents both
the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection. Effecting a change in just the angle of
reflection requires a simultaneous change in both the angle of incidence and the sound
frequency. Changing the angle of incidence may be accomplished by tilting the sound
beam, as illustrated in Fig. 20.2-5. However, creating such a tilt requires a complex
system that uses, for example, a phased array of acoustic transducers (several acoustic
transducers driven at relative phases selected to impart a tilt to the overall generated
sound wave). Changing the sound frequency requires a frequency modulator (FM),
which must be synchronized with phased array governing the angle of tilt.

Scanning with an acoustic beam. The requirement of tilting the sound wave
may be mitigated by making use a sound beam with an angular divergence equal to
or greater than the entire range of directions to be scanned. As the sound frequency
is changed, the Bragg angle is altered and the incoming light wave selects only that
acoustic plane-wave component with the matching direction. Though the efficiency of
such a system is expected to be low, we proceed to examine some of its properties.

962 CHAPTER20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
== \
\
h \
At
oe \
abe.
= ee
— =]
—- 9 |
— fi
— ee
=
—, /
—_ /
ooo /
/
ЕС
Figure 20.2-5 Scanning by changing the sound frequency and acoustic-wave direction. The planar
sound wave is tilted by using an array of transducers driven by signals that differ by a phase ф.
Scan Angle
For a sound frequency f, the incident light wave interacts with the sound component
at an angle 9 = (Л/2%.) f and is deflected by an angle 20 = (A/v;) f, as illustrated in
Fig. 20.2-6. By varying the sound frequency from fo to fo + В, the deflection angle 20
is Swept over a scan angle
А
До = — В. (20.2-6)
Us Scan Angle
This assumes, of course, that the sound beam has an angular width 90, = A/D, > ДО.
Since the scan angle is inversely proportional to the speed of sound, larger scan angles
are obtained by using materials with a small sound velocity vs.
Diffracted fo +B \ _—” +В
Incident light EZ Aé Ag on aw fo
ight | Л an
—. ight _ 0 №2
| ey 0
— |
0s =~ ;
й
Figure 20.2-6 Scanning an optical wave by varying the frequency of a sound beam over the
frequency range fo < f < fo В. The angular divergence of the sound beam is 00..
Number of Resolvable Spots
If the optical wave itself has a residual angular width 69 = A/D, and assuming that
00 < 00., then the deflected beam also has a width 00. The number of resolvable
spots of the scanner (the number of nonoverlapping angular widths within the scanning
range) is then given by
9 A/vs)B ПО
М = — = ОВ _ — В, (20.2-7)
50 A/D Us

20.2 ACOUSTO-OPTIC DEVICES 963
which we write as
. р

N=TB with T=—, (20.2-8)

Us Number of

Resolvable Spots

where B is the bandwidth of the FM modulator used to generate the sound and T =

D/vs, is the transit time of sound across the light beam (Fig. 20.2-7). The number of

resolvable spots, which is equal to the time—bandwidth product ТВ, represents the

degrees of freedom of the scanner and is a significant indicator of its capabilities.

Increasing N requires a large transit time Т, which is opposite to the design require-

ment for an acousto-optic modulator, where the modulation bandwidth B = 1/T is
enhanced by selecting a small value of T.

00
< \& Ap
90 \ Uo %
50 — \ A Nem
/ A Ly _. at _2-
i _-- z [-——
| a. Seo 1
= --- 22 i
= ~ /
= ——
60; = /
= /
/

Figure 20.2-7 Number of resolvable spots of an acousto-optic scanner.
ee
EXERCISE 20.2-2
Parameters of an Acousto-Optic Scanner. A fused-silica acousto-optic scanner (v, =
6 km/s, п = 1.46) is used to scan a He-Ne laser beam (A, = 633 nm). The sound frequency
is scanned over the range 40 to 60 MHz. To what width should the laser beam be focused so that
the number of resolvable spots is N = 100? What is the scan angle AQ? What would be the
effect of using a material with a smaller velocity of sound, such as extra-dense flint glass for which
Us = 3.1 km/s?
НИ
The Acousto-Optic Scanner as an Acoustic Spectrum Analyzer
The proportionality between the Bragg angle and the sound frequency stated in (20.2-
1) can be used to make an acoustic spectrum analyzer. A sound wave containing a
collection of different frequencies disperses the incident light in corresponding differ-
ent directions. The intensity of the deflected light in a given direction is proportional
to the intensity of the sound component at the corresponding frequency (Fig. 20.2-8).

964 — СНАРТЕВ20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
ИЕ
A - Figure 20.2-8 Each frequency com-
= 0 ` 1 ponent of the sound wave deflects light
—S arn in a different direction. The acousto-
optic cell thus serves as an acoustic
spectrum analyzer.
fthth
Ld
C. Space Switches
An acousto-optic cell can be used as a space switch (Sec. 24.3) that routes information
carried by one or more optical beams to one or more selected directions. Several
interconnection schemes are possible:
= An acousto-optic cell in which the frequency of the acoustic wave is one of №
possible values, f, }2,..., or fw, reflects an incident optical beam in one of
N corresponding directions, 9;,02,..., or Oy, as illustrated in Fig. 20.2-9. The
device routes one beam to any of N directions.
р
: Figure 20.2-9 Routing ап optical
Lm | beam to one of N directions. By apply-
| : .
ing an acoustic wave of frequency fs, for
example, the optical beam is reflected at
an angle 63 and routed to point 3.
A —
ANY s
= Using an acoustic wave comprising two frequencies that are simultaneously
present, f; and fo, allows the incident optical beam to be simultaneously reflected
in the two corresponding directions, 91 and 95. A single beam is thereby connected
to any pair of many possible directions, as illustrated in Fig. 20.2-10. More
generally, an acoustic wave comprising М simultaneously present frequencies
allows the incident beam to be simultaneously routed in M directions. An
example of this configuration is the acoustic spectrum analyzer schematized
in Fig. 20.2-8. The light beam is simultaneously routed to М points, and the
intensity at each point is proportional to the intensity of the corresponding sound-
frequency component.
к LK | Figure 20.2-10 Routing a light beam
simultaneously in a number of direc-
Е tions.
Ath
Ld
WWW WW
= The length of the acousto-optic cell may be divided into two segments. At a
certain time, an acoustic wave of frequency f; is present in one segment and an
acoustic wave of frequency f2 is present in the other. This can be accomplished

20.2 ACOUSTO-OPTIC DEVICES 965
by generating the acoustic wave from a frequency shift keyed electric signal in
the form of two pulses: a pulse of frequency f; followed by another of frequency
fo, each with a duration T/2, where T = w/vs is the transit time of sound
through the length w of the cell (Fig. 20.2-11). When the leading edge of the
acoustic wave reaches the end of the cell, the cell processes two incoming optical
beams by reflecting the top beam in the direction 6; corresponding to f;, and
the bottom beam in the direction 05 corresponding to f2. This is a switch that
connects each of two beams to any of many possible directions. By placing more
than one frequency component in each segment, each of the two beams can itself
be simultaneously routed in several directions.

[= |
и Е | Figure 20.2-11 Routing each of two
2 light beams in a set of specified direc-
= : tions. The acoustic wave is generated by
i | 62 a frequency shift keyed electric signal.
Ta
= The cell may also be divided into N segments, each carrying a harmonic acoustic
wave of the same frequency f but of different amplitude. The result is a spa-
tial light modulator (SLM) that modulates the intensities of N input beams
(Fig. 20.2-12). Spatial light modulators are useful in optical signal processing
(Sec. 21.1E).
1
2 Ss
— Figure 20.2-12 The spatial light
= modulator modulates N optical beams.
ний The acoustic wave is driven Бу ап
N L = amplitude-modulated electric signal.
LS
oi =
TTT LT! t
= The most general interconnection architecture is one for which the cell is divided
into L segments, each carrying an acoustic wave with М frequencies. The device
acts as a random access switch that simultaneously routes each of Г, incoming
beams in Л directions (Fig. 20.2-13).
“=, А
2 1 Е
ГЕ
Ен (=| Figure 20.2-13 | Anarbitrary-
= | interconnection switch routing
mM MN M roc ANA each of L incoming light beams
VV WV о В ТА t for random access to М points.

966 CHAPTER20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
Interconnection Capacity
There is an upper limit to the number of interconnections that may be established by an
acousto-optic device, as will be shown below. If an acousto-optic cell is used to route
each of Г, incoming optical beams to a maximum of М directions simultaneously, the
product MT cannot exceed the time—bandwidth product N = TB, where T is the
transit time through the cell and B is the bandwidth of the acoustic wave:

ML<N. (20.2-9)

Interconnection Capacity

This upper bound on the number of interconnections is called the interconnection
capacity of the device.

An acousto-optic cell with Г segments relies on an acoustic wave composed of
Г, segments, each of time duration T/L. For each segment to address М indepen-
dent points, the acoustic wave must carry М independent frequency components рег
segment. For a signal of duration Т/Г, there is an inherent frequency uncertainty of
L/T Hz. The M frequency components must therefore be separated by at least that
uncertainty. For the М components to be placed within the available bandwidth В, we
must have M(L/T) < B, from which ML < TB so that (20.2-9) follows.

A single optical beam (Г, = 1), for example, can be connected to any of М = TB
points, but each of two beams can be connected to at most N’/2 points, and so on. It is
a question of dividing an available time—bandwidth product N = ТВ in the form of Ё
time segments, each containing М independent frequencies. Examples of the possible
choices are illustrated in the time—frequency diagram presented in Fig. 20.2-14.

f f || тим f ти
a 1 te
ия T— т них

1 t t

(a) Scanner (b) SLM (c) Switch
Figure 20.2-14 Several examples of dividing the time—bandwidth region ТВ in the ите-
frequency diagram into N = ТВ subdivisions (in this diagram N = 20). (a) Scanner: a single
time segment containing N frequency segments. (b) Spatial light modulator: N time segments, each
containing one frequency component. (с) /nterconnection switch: L time segments, each containing
М = N/L frequency segments (in this diagram, М = 20, М = 4, and L = 5).
D. Filters, Frequency Shifters, and Isolators
The acousto-optic cell is useful for a number of other devices, including filters, fre-
quency shifters, and optical isolators.
Tunable Acousto-Optic Filters
The Bragg condition sin 0 = Л/2Л relates the angle 0, the acoustic wavelength A, and
the optical wavelength Л. If 0 and A are specified, Bragg reflection can occur only for
a single optical wavelength, А = 2A sin 0. This wavelength-selective property can be
used to filter an optical wave containing a broad spectrum of wavelengths. The filter is
tuned by changing the angle 9 or the sound frequency }.

20.3 ACOUSTO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 967
ee
EXERCISE 20.2-3
Resolving Power of an Acousto-Optic Filter. | Show that the spectral resolving power ^/АЛ
of an acousto-optic filter is equal to f 7, where f is the sound frequency, T is the transit time, and
АЛ is the minimum resolvable wavelength difference.
ee
Frequency Shifters
Optical frequency shifters are useful in many photonic applications, including opti-
cal heterodyne systems, optical FM modulators, and laser Doppler velocimeters. An
acousto-optic cell may be used as a tunable frequency shifter since the Bragg reflected
light is frequency shifted (up or down) by the frequency of the sound (Sec. 20.1А).
In a heterodyne optical receiver, a received amplitude-modulated or phase-modulated
optical signal is mixed with a coherent optical wave from a local light source, acting
as a local oscillator with a different frequency. The two optical waves beat with each
other (Sec. 2.6B) and the detected signal varies at the difference frequency. Informa-
tion relating to the amplitude and phase of the received signal can be extracted from
the detected signal (Sec. 25.4). The acousto-optic cell offers a convenient means for
imparting the frequency shift required for the heterodyning process.

Optical Isolators
An optical isolator is a one-way optical valve that is often used to prevent reflected
light from retracing its path back into the original light source (Secs. 6.6D and 24.1С).
Optical isolators are sometimes used with laser diodes since the reflected light can
adversely affect the lasing process. The acousto-optic cell can serve as an isolator. If
part of the frequency-upshifted Bragg-diffracted light is reflected onto itself by a mirror
and traces its path back into the cell, as illustrated in Fig. 20.2-15, it undergoes a second
Bragg diffraction accompanied by a second frequency upshift. Since the frequency of
the returning light differs from that of the original light by twice the sound frequency, a
filter may be used to block it. Even without a filter, the laser process may be insensitive
to the frequency-shifted light.
Source Filter —
> + ag =

f = Mirror Figure 20.2-15 An acousto-optic isolator.

AAAAAAAAA ADA .
*20.3 ACOUSTO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA

The scalar theory of the interaction of light and sound is generalized in this section to
include the anisotropic properties of the medium and the effects of polarization of light
and sound.
Acoustic Waves in Anisotropic Materials
An acoustic wave is a wave of material strain. Strain is defined in terms of the displace-
ments of molecules relative to their equilibrium positions. If u = (uy, м2, из) is the

968 CHAPTER20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
vector of displacement of the molecules located at position x = (51, 12, хз), the strain
tensor, which is symmetrical, has components s;; = 5 (Ou; /дх; + Ou;/Ox;), where
the indices 7, 7 = 1, 2,3 denote the coordinates (x, у, z). The element 533 = диз/дтз,
for example, represents tensile strain (stretching) in the z direction [Fig. 20.3-1(a)],
whereas $13 represents shear strain since Ou; /дхз is the relative movement in the т
direction of two incrementally separated parallel planes normal to the z direction, as
illustrated in Fig. 20.3-1(5).
x x ;
и из+Ди
ы ты 3 Fu, ig + Au,
|

| 1 } | |

| 1

| 1

< < zt+Az
|
v В
(a) Tensile strain (b) Shear
Figure 20.3-1 Displacements associated with tensile strain and shear.

An acoustic wave can be longitudinal or transverse, as illustrated by the following
examples.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 20.3-1. Longitudinal Acoustic Wave. А wave with the displacement и: = 0,
ug = 0, из = Ap sin(Qt — gz), where Ад is a constant, corresponds to a strain tensor in which all
components vanish except

833 = So cos(Qt — 42), (20.3-1)
where Sy = —qAp. This is a wave that stretches in the z direction and also travels in the z direction.
Since the vibrations lie along the same direction as the wave propagation, the wave is longitudinal.
EXAMPLE 20.3-2. Transverse Acoustic Wave. A wave with the displacement и: =
Apo sin(Qt — 42), из = 0, из = 0, corresponds to a strain tensor in which all components vanish
except

$13 = 531 = So cos(Qt — 42), (20.3-2)
where Sp = — $qAo. This wave travels in the z direction but vibrates in the x direction. It is therefore
a transverse (shear) wave.
«ПИ
The velocities of longitudinal and transverse acoustic waves are characteristics of the
medium and generally depend on the direction of propagation.
The Photoelastic Effect
The optical properties of an anisotropic medium are completely characterized by the
electric impermeability tensor 7 = вое" (Sec. 6.3). Given п, we can determine
the index ellipsoid and hence the refractive indices for an optical wave of arbitrary
polarization traveling in an arbitrary direction.

In the presence of strain, the electric impermeability tensor is modified so that
п becomes a function of the elements of the strain tensor, ni; = mij (Sxi). This
dependence is called the photoelastic effect. Each of the nine functions 1; (54) may

20.3 ACOUSTO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 969
be expanded in a Taylor series in terms of the nine variables зи. Maintaining only the
linear terms provides

п (Sa) = 15 (0) + So piers, 4,9, 1k = 1, 2,8, (20.3-3)
kl
where the quantities рум = Oni;/Os;. are the components of а fourth-rank tensor
known as the photoelasticity tensor (sometimes called the elasto-optic tensor or the
strain-optic tensor).

Since both {n;;} and {5} are symmetrical tensors, the coefficients {ри} are
invariant to permutations of 2 and 7, and to permutations of А and /. There are therefore
only six (rather than nine) independent values for the set (7,7) and six independent
values for (К, [). The pair of indices (7, 7) is usually contracted to a single index J =
1,2,...,6 (see Table 21.2-1). The indices (k,1) are similarly contracted and denoted
by the index К = 1,2,...,6. The fourth-rank tensor руку is then described by a 6 x 6
matrix ргк.

Moreover, the symmetry of the crystal requires that some of the coefficients prx
vanish and that certain coefficients are related. The matrix рук for a cubic crystal, for
example, has the structure

Ри Pr Pr 0 O 0
Pe Pu Pre 0 O 0
12 Pe Pu 0 O 0
рук = im И im pu 0 о |. _ (20.3-4)
оо о 0. р 0 Photoelasticity Matrix
44 Cubic Crystal
ооо 0 0. pat ( ystal)
This matrix is also applicable for isotropic media, with the additional constraint p44 =
(Pi — р12), which leads to only two independent coefficients. It is analogous to the
Kerr electro-optic matrix згк for isotropic media displayed in Table 21.2-3.
EXAMPLE 20.3-3. Longitudinal Acoustic Wave in a Cubic Crystal. The longitudinal
acoustic wave described in Example 20.3-1 travels along one of the axes of a cubic crystal of
refractive index n. Substituting (20.3-1) and (20.3-4) into (20.3-3), we find that the associated strain
results in an impermeability tensor with elements
1
Щи = 122 = ne + р1250 cos(Qt — 42) (20.3-5)
1
N33 = ne + P1150 cos(Qt — 42) (20.3-6)
nig = 0, 17]. (20.3-7)
Thus, the initially optically isotropic cubic crystal becomes a uniaxial crystal with the optic axis along
the direction of the acoustic wave (z direction) and with ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices,
No and пе, respectively, given by
1 1
—5 = — + P1250 cos(Qt — 42) (20.3-8)
ne п
1 1
= P11 So cos(Qt — 42). (20.3-9)
ne п
The shape of the index ellipsoid is altered periodically in time and space in the form of a wave,
but the principal axes remain unchanged (Fig. 20.3-2). Since the change in the refractive indices

970 CHAPTER 20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
is typically small, the second terms in (20.3-8) and (20.3-9) are small, so that the approximation
(1+ А)- 2 = 1 — A/2 for |A| < 1 may be applied, whereupon (20.3-8) and (20.3-9) become
No Bn— 51? р1250 cos(Qt — 42) (20.3-10)
Ne = п — $n p11 50 cos(MNt — 42). (20.3-11)
xX
Qt - qz=0
Ot - qz= 1/2
и -45=л Figure 20.3-2 А longitudinal acoustic
wave traveling in the z direction in a cubic
crystal alters the shape of the index ellipsoid
y from a sphere to an ellipsoid of revolution
whose dimensions vary sinusoidally with
time; the optic axis is along the z direction.
ПИ
сс Е
EXERCISE 20.3-1
Transverse Acoustic Wave in a Cubic Crystal. The transverse acoustic wave described in
Example 20.3-2 travels along one of the axes of a cubic crystal. Show that the crystal becomes biaxial
with principal refractive indices
nen Ут? pas So cos(Qt — qz) (20.3-12)
Ng & п (20.3-13)
пят én ра450 cos(Qt — 42). (20.3-14)
ee
In Example 20.3-3 and Exercise 20.3-1, the acoustic wave alters the principal values
of the index ellipsoid but not its principal directions, so that the ellipsoid maintains its
orientation. This is not always the case, however. Acoustic waves with other directions
and polarizations relative to the principal axes of the crystal result in alterations of the
principal refractive indices as well as the principal axes of the crystal.
Bragg Diffraction
The interaction of a linearly polarized optical wave with a longitudinal or transverse
acoustic wave in an anisotropic medium can be described by the same principles as
those set forth in Sec. 20.1. The incident optical wave is diffracted from the acoustic
wave if the Bragg condition for constructive interference is satisfied. The analysis
is a bit more complex than that for the scalar theory, however, since the incident
and reflected waves travel with different velocities; thus, the angles of reflection and
incidence need not be equal.
The condition for Bragg diffraction is the conservation-of-momentum (phase-
matching) condition provided in (20.1-16),
К, =К- а. (20.3-15)
Now, however, the magnitudes of these wavevectors are К = (27/X.)n, К, =
(27 /Ao)n, and а = (27/A), where Ло and A are the optical and acoustic wavelengths,

20.3 ACOUSTO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA = 971
and n and п.. are the refractive indices of the incident and reflected optical waves,
respectively.

As illustrated in Fig. 20.3-3, 1 0 and 6, are the angles of incidence and reflection,
respectively, the vector equation (20.3-15) may be replaced with two scalar equations
relating the z and x components of the wavevectors in the plane of incidence:

2 2
^^ д, cos 9. = an cos 9 (20.3-16)
Ао Ло
2п 27 27
—n, sin 6, + — пзшд = —, 20.3-17
Xo ye ( )
from which
n, cos 6, = ncos@ (20.3-18a)
А
n, sin 0, + пзш0 = i" (20.3-18b)
Given the wavelengths Л. and A, the angles 0 and @, may be determined by solving
(20.3-18). Note that n and п. are generally functions of 6 and 6,. that may be deter-
mined from the index ellipsoid of the unperturbed crystal.
\
2K y a —
х р № Г
\ Oy kr | Figure 20.3-3 Bragg condition (conserva-
z ма tion of momentum or phase-matching condi-
Чл tion) in an anisotropic medium.
k
i

For collinear optical and acoustic waves, the phase-matching conditions are readily
inferred from the vector configurations displayed in Fig. 20.3-4. For front-reflection
we have К, = К + q, where k,, К, and 4 are the magnitudes of the respective vectors
with no signs attached. This gives rise to n, — п = A,/A. For back-reflection we have
k, + К = q, which leads to n, + п = Ло/Л. Combining both results in the form of a
single equation yields

А
п. п = ^°. (20.3-19)
A
For back reflection (+ sign), A must be smaller than Ло, which is unlikely except for
very-high-frequency acoustic waves. For front reflection (— sign), the incident and
reflected waves must have different polarizations so that n, 5 п.
q k — k
— Г — : .
Figure 20.3-4 Wavevector diagrams

+ for front and back reflections of ап

| | optical wave from an acoustic wave.

К — Ч

с Ку
Г
(a) Front reflection (b) Back reflection

972 CHAPTER20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
READING LIST

Acousto-Optics

See also the reading list on crystals and tensor analysis in Chapter 6.

T.-C. Poon and T. Kim, Engineering Optics with MATLAB, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2018, Chapter 4.

N. A. Riza, Photonic Signals and Systems: An Introduction, McGraw-Hill, 2013, Chapters 5 and 7.

P. A. Daymier, ed., Acoustic Metamaterials and Phononic Crystals, Springer-Verlag, 2013.

7. С. Joshi, Acousto-Optic Devices and Their Defence Applications, Defence Scientific Information
& Documentation Centre (Delhi), 2007.

J. Р. Wolfe, Imaging Phonons: Acoustic Wave Propagation in Solids, Cambridge University Press,
2005.

A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals: Propagation and Control of Laser Radiation, Wiley,
2003, Chapters 9 and 10.

М. Вот and Е. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University Press, 7th expanded and corrected
ed. 2002, Chapter 12.

р. Royer and Е. Dieulesaint, Elastic Waves in Solids II: Generation, Acousto-Optic Interaction,
Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2000.

A. Korpel, Acousto-Optics, CRC Press, 2nd ed. 1997.

J. Xu and R. Stroud, Acousto-Optic Devices: Principles, Design and Applications, Wiley, 1992.

С. 5. Tsai, Guided-Wave Acoustooptics: Interactions, Devices, and Applications, Springer-Verlag,
1990, reprinted 2011.

A. Korpel, ed., Selected Papers on Acousto-Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series
Volume 16), 1990.

M. Gottlieb, C. L. M. Ireland, and J. M. Ley, Electro-Optic and Acousto-Optic Scanning and Deflec-
tion, CRC Press, 1983.

Т. S. Narasimhamurty, Photoelastic and Electro-Optic Properties of Crystals, Springer-Verlag/Plenum,
1981.

D. F. Nelson, Electric, Optic, and Acoustic Interactions in Dielectrics, Wiley, 1979.

M. V. Berry, The Diffraction of Light by Ultrasound, Academic Press, 1966.

L. Brillouin, Diffusion de la lumiére et des rayons X par un corps transparent homogéne: Influence de
l’agitation thermique [Diffusion of Light and X-rays by a Transparent Homogeneous Body: The
Influence of Thermal Excitations], Annales de Physique (Paris), vol. 9, по. 17, pp. 88-122, 1922.

W. L. Bragg, The Diffraction of X-Rays by Crystals (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1915), in Nobel
Lectures in Physics, 1901-1921, World Scientific, 1998.

PROBLEMS
20.1-1 Diffraction of Light from Various Periodic Structures. Discuss the diffraction of an
optical plane wave of wavelength from the following periodic structures, indicating in
each case the geometrical configuration and the frequency shift(s):
(a) An acoustic traveling wave of wavelength A.
(b) An acoustic standing wave of wavelength A.
(c) A graded-index transparent medium with refractive index that varies sinusoidally with
position (period A).
(d) A stratified medium comprising parallel layers of two materials of different refractive
indices that alternate to form a periodic structure of period A (Sec. 7.1C).

PROBLEMS 973

*20.1-2 Bragg Diffraction as a Scattering Process. An incident optical wave of angular
frequency w, wavevector k, and complex envelope A interacts with a medium per-

turbed by an acoustic wave of angular frequency 2. and wavevector а, and creates

a light source $ described by (20.1-32). The angle 9 corresponds to upshifted Bragg

diffraction, so that the scattering light source is $ = Re{5S,(r)exp(jw,t)}, where

5,(г) = —(Ат/п) Е? Aexp(—jk, -r), w, = w +, andk, = К +q. This source

emits a scattered field Е. Assuming that the incident wave is undepleted by the acousto-

optic interaction (first Born approximation, 1.е., А remains approximately constant), the

scattered light may be obtained by solving the Helmholtz equation V?E + k?E = —S.

This equation has the far-field solution (Prob. 22.2-6)

~ exp(—jkr) / Las зи /
Е(г) = tar ] 5, (г’) exp(jkr +r’) dr’,

where Г is a unit vector in the direction of г, К = 2” /^, and У is the volume of the source.

Use this equation to determine an expression for the intensity reflectance of the acousto-

optic cell when the Bragg condition is satisfied. Compare the result with (20.1-22).

20.1-3 Condition for Raman-Nath Diffraction. Derive an expression for the maximum width
D, of an acoustic beam of wavelength A that permits Raman—Nath diffraction of light of
wavelength (refer to Fig. 20.1-10).

*20.1-4 Combined Acousto-Optic and Electro-Optic Modulation. One end of a lithium niobate

(LiNbOs3) crystal is placed inside a microwave cavity that contains an electromagnetic field

at a frequency of 3 GHz. As a result of the piezoelectric effect (an electric field creates a

strain in the material), an acoustic wave is launched in the crystal, which has a refractive

index of n = 2.3 and in which the velocity of sound is v, = 7.4 km/s. Light from a Не-

Ne laser (A, = 633 nm) is reflected from the acoustic wave. Determine the Bragg angle.

Since lithium niobate is also an electro-optic material, the applied electric field modulates

the refractive index, which in turn modulates the phase of the incident light. Sketch the

spectrum of the reflected light. If the microwave electric field is a pulse of short duration,
sketch the spectrum of the reflected light at different times, indicating the contributions of
the electro-optic and acousto-optic effects.

20.2-4 Choice of Materials for Acousto-Optic Modulators. Consider the following materials for
possible use as Bragg reflectors: 1) CaF 2; 2) fused silica; 3) TiOg; 4) LINbOs; 5) Si; and
6) Ge.

(a) For each material, determine the wavelength region of transparency (see Fig. 5.5-1);
the acousto-optic figure of merit М specified in (20.1-7); and the amplitude of the
refractive-index wave Ang launched by an acoustic wave of intensity 10 W/cm?. Com-
pare your results with those for extra-dense flint glass provided in Example 20.1-1.

(b) If each of these Bragg cells is placed in air, determine the internal and external Bragg
angles for the diffraction of an optical wave of free-space wavelength A, = 2.5 um
from a sound wave of frequency } = 100 MHz. Compare your results with those for
extra-dense flint glass provided in Example 20.1-2.

(с) For light of wavelength A, = 2.5 wm, a sound intensity of J, = 100 W/cm’, and a
penetration length of the light through the sound of L/sin@ = 1 mm, determine the
intensity reflectance R, for each material. Compare your results with those for extra-
dense flint glass provided in Example 20. 1-3.

(4) Which materials promise the best performance at A, = 0.532 «um? At 1.06 ит? At
10.6 ит?

20.2-5 Frequency Shifting with a Bragg Reflector. Devise a system for converting a monochro-
matic optical wave with complex wavefunction U(t) = Aexp(jwt) into a modulated wave
of complex wavefunction A cos(Qt) exp(jwt) by making use of an acousto-optic cell with
an acoustic wave 3(1,6) = Sy cos(Qt — 41). Hint: Consider the use of upshifted and
downshifted Bragg reflections.

20.2-6 Frequency-Shift-Free Bragg Reflector. Design an acousto-optic system that deflects light
without imparting a frequency shift. Hint: Use two Bragg cells.

*20.3-2 Front Bragg Diffraction. A transverse acoustic wave of wavelength A travels along the

x direction in a uniaxial crystal whose refractive indices are п. and п. and whose optic

axis in the z direction. Derive an expression for the wavelength Л. of an incident optical

974 — СНАРТЕВ20 ACOUSTO-OPTICS
wave, traveling in the x direction and polarized in the z direction, that satisfies the Bragg-
diffraction condition. What is the polarization of the front reflected wave? Determine A if
Ло = 633 nm, пе = 2.200, and n, = 2.286.

CHAPTER
ee
21.1 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRO-OPTICS 977

А. Pockels and Kerr Effects
В. Electro-Optic Modulators and Switches
C. Scanners
D. Directional Couplers
Е. Spatial Light Modulators
*21.2 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 989
А. Pockels and Kerr Effects
B. Modulators
21.3 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS 996
A. Wave Retarders and Modulators
B. Spatial Light Modulators and Displays
*21.4 PHOTOREFRACTIVITY 1005
21.5 ELECTROABSORPTION 1010
<
| ne Ki
& j
Friedrich Pockels (1865-1913), a German John Kerr (1824—1907), a Scottish physicist,
physicist, described the linear electro-optic discovered the quadratic electro-optic effect in
effect in 1884. 1875.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa Е. A. Saleh and Malvin Сай Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
975

CSC
Much as with acousto-optics (Chapter 20), electro-optics is a branch of photonics that
deals with the modulation, switching, deflection, scanning, and redirection of optical
beams. However, in electro-optics attention is directed to the implementation of these
operations by means of transparent materials whose optical properties are altered when
subjected to an electric field, rather than to an acoustic wave. The electric field distorts
the positions, orientations, and/or shapes of the molecules that constitute the material.
The electro-optic effect represents a change in the refractive index of the material that
results from the application of a steady or low-frequency electric field (Fig. 21.0-1).
In particular, an electric field applied to an anisotropic optical material modifies its
refractive indices and thereby the effect that the material has on polarized light passing

through it.

Electric
field :
Figure 21.0-1 A steady electric field applied
МЕ — to an electro-optic material changes its refractive
—— index. This in turn changes the effect of the
material on light traveling through it. The electric
Electro-optic field therefore controls the light.
material

The dependence of the refractive index on the applied electric field usually assumes
one of two forms:

= The refractive index changes in proportion to the applied electric field, an effect

known as the linear electro-optic effect or Pockels effect.

= The refractive index changes in proportion to the square of the applied electric

field, an effect known as the quadratic electro-optic effect or Kerr effect.

The change in the refractive index is typically small. Nevertheless, the phase of
an optical wave propagating through an electro-optic medium can be modified sig-
nificantly if the distance of travel substantially exceeds the wavelength of the light.
As an example, if the refractive index is increased by 10-5 by virtue of the presence
of the electric field, an optical wave propagating a distance of 10° wavelengths will
experience an additional phase shift of 27.

Materials whose refractive index can be modified by means of an applied electric
field are useful for producing electrically controllable optical devices, as indicated by
the following examples:

= A lens made of a material whose refractive index can be varied is a lens of

controllable focal length.

= A prism whose beam-bending capability is controllable can be used as an optical

scanning device.

= Light transmitted through a transparent plate of controllable refractive index un-

dergoes a controllable phase shift so that the plate can be used as an optical phase
modulator.

= An anisotropic crystal whose refractive indices can be changed serves as a wave

retarder of controllable retardation; it may be used to change the polarization
properties of light.

= A wave retarder placed between two crossed polarizers results in transmitted light

whose intensity is dependent on the phase retardation (Sec. 6.6B). The transmit-
tance of such a device is therefore electrically controllable so that it can be used
as an optical intensity modulator or an optical switch.

Controllable components such as these find substantial use in optical signal-processing

and in optical fiber communications applications.

976

21.1 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRO-OPTICS 977

Alternatively, an electric field can be used to modify the optical properties of a
material via absorption. A semiconductor material is normally optically transparent to
light whose wavelength is longer than the bandgap wavelength (Sec. 17.2B). However,
an applied electric field can reduce the bandgap of the material, thereby facilitating
absorption and converting the material from transparent to opaque. This effect, known
as electroabsorption, is useful for making optical modulators and switches.

This Chapter

We begin with a description of the electro-optic effect and the principles of electro-
optic modulation and scanning. The initial presentation in Sec. 21.1 is simplified by
deferring the detailed consideration of anisotropic effects to Sec. 21.2.

Section 21.3 is devoted to the electro-optic properties of liquid crystals. An electric
field applied to the molecules of a liquid crystal causes them to alter their orientations.
This in turn leads to changes in the optical properties of the medium, i.e., it exhibits
an electro-optic effect. The molecules of a twisted nematic liquid crystal, for example,
are organized in a helical pattern so that they normally act as a polarization rotator. An
applied electric field can be used to remove this helical pattern, thereby deactivating
the rotatory power of the material. Turning the electric field off results in the material
regaining its original helical structure and therefore its rotatory power. Hence, the
device acts as a dynamic polarization rotator. The use of fixed polarizers in conjunction
with such a polarization rotator permits it to serve as an intensity modulator or switch.
This behavior is the basis of most liquid-crystal display devices.

The electro-optic properties of photorefractive media are considered in Sec. 21.4.
These are materials in which the absorption of light creates an internal electric field,
which in turn initiates an electro-optic effect that alters the optical properties of the
medium. Thus, the optical properties of the medium are indirectly controlled by the
light incident on it. Photorefractive devices therefore permit light to control light.
Finally, a brief introduction to electroabsorption is provided in Sec. 21.5.

21.1 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRO-OPTICS
A. Pockels and Kerr Effects
The refractive index of an electro-optic medium is a function n(F) of an applied elec-
tric field F that is steady (or slowly varying in comparison with optical frequencies).
The function (Е) varies only slightly with Е so that it can be expanded in a Taylor
series about Ё = 0,

п(Е) = п+аЕ + 1а› Е? -+..., (21.1-1)
where the coefficients of expansion are п = п(0), аа = (ап/аЕ)|Е-о, and ag =
(d?n/dE”)| во. For reasons that will become apparent below, it is conventional to
write (21.1-1) in terms of two new coefficients, r = —2a,/n3 ands = —az/n°, known
as the electro-optic coefficients, so that

п(Е) =п- 1тп?Е — 1513 BE? + .... (21.1-2)
The second- and higher-order terms of this series are typically many orders of magni-
tude smaller than n. Terms higher than the third can safely be neglected.

For future use in connection with the optical properties of anisotropic media
(Sec. 6.3A), it is convenient to derive an expression for the electric impermeability
of the electro-optic medium, n = в/с = 1/n?, as a function of Е. The incremental

978 — СНАРТЕВ21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
change An = (dn/dn)An = (—2/n?)(—$rn3E — 1313 Е?) =r E +s E®, so that
п(Е) = п+тгЕ +32”, (21.1-3)
where п = 1(0). The electro-optic coefficients г and s are therefore simply the co-
efficients of proportionality of the two terms of An with Е and Е?, respectively.
This explains the seemingly odd definitions of r and s used in (21.1-2). The values
of the coefficients r and s depend on the direction of the applied electric field and the
polarization of the light, as will be discussed in Sec. 21.2.
Pockels Effect
There is a large class of materials for which the third term of (21.1-2) is negligible in
comparison with the second, whereupon
п(Е) = п — 1тпЗЕ, (21.1-4)
Pockels Effect
as illustrated in Fig. 21.1-1(а). The medium is then known аз a Pockels medium (or a
Pockels cell) and the coefficient r is called the Pockels coefficient or the linear electro-
optic coefficient. The change in refractive index induced by the electric field in the
Pockel’s effect [(21.1-4)] is analogous to that induced by strain in the acousto-optic
effect [(20.1-3)]. Typical values of r lie in the range 10-1? to 10-0 m/V (or 1 to
100 pm/V). For Е = 10° V/m (e.g., 10 kV applied across а 1-cm-thick cell), for
example, the term $r °F in (21.1-4) is on the order of 10~© to 10-4. Changes in the
refractive index induced by electric fields are indeed very small. Crystals commonly
used as Pockels cells include KTiOPO, (KTP), 8-BaB20,4 (BBO), KH2PO, (КОР),
NH4H2POy, (ADP), LiNbOs, and LiTaO3. Specially designed polymers can also serve
this purpose.
n(E) п(Е)
п п
(а) 0 E (b) 0 E
Figure 21.1-1 Dependence of the refractive index on the electric field: (а) Pockels medium; (6)
Kerr medium.
Kerr Effect
If the material is centrosymmetric, as is the case for gases, liquids, and certain crystals,
п(Е) must be an even symmetric function [Fig. 21.1-1(6)] since it must be invariant to
the reversal of Е. The linear term then vanishes when г = 0, whereupon
п(Е) = п — 1313 Е”. (21.1-5)
Kerr Effect
The material is then known as a Kerr medium (or a Kerr cell) and the parameter s is
called the Kerr coefficient or the quadratic electro-optic coefficient. Typical values of
s lie between 10-18 and 10-4 m?/V? in crystals, and between 10-2? and 10-1 m?/V?
in liquids. For Е = 10° V/m, for example, the term 4s n3E? in (21.1-5) is on the order
of 10-6 to 10-2 in crystals and 10710 to 10-7 in liquids.

21.1 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRO-OPTICS 979
B. Electro-Optic Modulators and Switches
Phase Modulators
A beam of light traversing a Pockels cell of length Г, to which an electric field Е is
applied undergoes a phase shift ф = n(E) ko L = 27n(E)L/Xo, where A, is the free-
space wavelength. Using (21.1-4), we therefore have
3 EL
ye yy —- Tt, (21.1-6)
Ло
where фо = 27nL/Xo. If the electric field is obtained by applying a voltage V across
two faces of the cell separated by a distance d, then Е = V/d and (21.1-6) provides
ф
ф еек
0 |
о у
| P= 0-7, (21.1-7)
0 T Phase Modulation
0 Vr у
where
а A
=. (21.1-8)
Lrn Half-Wave Voltage
The parameter У», known as the half-wave voltage, is the applied voltage at which the
phase shift changes by м.

Equation (21.1-7) expresses a linear relation between the optical phase shift and
the voltage. One can therefore modulate the phase of an optical wave by varying the
voltage У applied across a material through which the light passes. The parameter У»
is an important characteristic of the modulator. It depends on the material properties (n
andr), on the wavelength Ло, and on the aspect ratio d/L. The value of the electro-optic
coefficient r depends on the directions of propagation and the applied field since the
crystal is, in general, anisotropic, as explained in Sec. 21.2. As illustrated in Fig. 21.1-
2, the electric field may be applied in a direction parallel to the direction of light
propagation (longitudinal modulator), in which case d = L, or perpendicular thereto
(transverse modulator).

т >
у
I
|
и i d у
АУ mm +
(а) (b) (c)
Figure 21.1-2 (a) Longitudinal modulator. The electrodes may take the shape of washers or bands,
or may be transparent conductors. (6) Transverse modulator. (с) Traveling-wave transverse modulator.
Typical values of the half-wave voltage are in the vicinity of 1 to a few kilovolts for longitudinal
modulators, and hundreds of volts for transverse modulators.

980 — СНАРТЕВ21 ELECTRO-OPTICS

The speed at which an electro-optic modulator operates is limited by electrical
capacitive effects and by the transit time of the light through the material. If the slowly
varying electric field E(t) varies significantly within the light transit time 7, the trav-
eling optical wave will be subjected to different electric fields as it traverses the crystal.
The modulated phase at a given time $ will then be proportional to the average electric
field E(t) at times from t — T to t. As a result, the transit-time-limited modulation
bandwidth is = 1/Т. One method of reducing this time is to apply the voltage У at
one end of the crystal while the electrodes serve as a transmission line, as illustrated in
Fig. 21.1-2(c). If the velocity of the traveling electrical wave matches that of the optical
wave, transit time effects can, in principle, be eliminated. Commercial modulators in
forms such as those shown in Fig. 21.1-2 generally operate up to the GHz domain.

As illustrated in Fig. 21.1-3, electro-optic modulators can also be constructed in
the form of integrated-photonic devices, which operate at higher speeds and at lower
voltages than bulk devices. An optical waveguide is fabricated on an electro-optic
substrate (often LiNbO3) by indiffusing a material (such as Ti) to increase the refractive
index, and the electric field is applied to the waveguide using electrodes. Because the
configuration is transverse, and the width of the waveguide is much smaller than its
length (d < L), the half-wave voltage can be as small as several volts. Modulators
such as these can be operated at speeds in excess of 100 GHz. Light can be conveniently
coupled into, and out of, such devices by the use of optical fibers.

у
Input Waveguide ы ;
— light В 0
Cross section
0 Modulated
light
Figure 21.1-3 An integrated-photonic phase modulator using the electro-optic effect.

Dynamic Wave Retarders
An anisotropic medium has two linearly polarized normal modes that propagate with
different velocities, say cy/n1 and со/п2 (Sec. 6.3B). If the medium exhibits the Pock-
els effect, then in the presence of a steady electric field Е the two refractive indices are
modified in accordance with (21.1-4), so that

т(Е) © ny — ти Е (21.1-9)

п2(Е) = ng — 13 Е, (21.1-10)
where т! and rz are the appropriate Pockels coefficients (anisotropic effects are exam-
ined in detail in Sec. 21.2). After propagating a distance L, the two modes thus undergo
a relative phase retardation given by

Г= № [и (Е) — п2(Е)]Ё = ko (ny — ng)L — $ko (rin? —ren3)EL. — (21.1-11)

ПЕ results from the application of a voltage У across two surfaces of the medium
separated by a distance d, (21.1-11) can be written in compact form as

21.1 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRO-OPTICS 981
г
|"
ГЕ -ту, (21.1-12)
0 т Phase Retardation
0 Vr у
where Го = Ао(п1 — п2) Г, 15 the phase retardation in the absence of the electric field.
The applied voltage V, necessary to obtain a phase retardation 7 is then given by
d А
=. (21.1-13)
Lryny — rans Retardation Half-Wave Voltage
Equation (21.1-12) indicates that the phase retardation is linearly related to the ap-
plied voltage so that the medium behaves as an electrically controllable dynamic wave
retarder.
Intensity Modulators: Use of a Phase Modulator in an Interferometer
Phase delay (or retardation) alone does not affect the intensity of a light beam. How-
ever, a phase modulator placed in one branch of an interferometer can function as
an intensity modulator. Consider, for example, the Mach—Zehnder interferometer por-
trayed in Fig. 21.1-4. If the beamsplitters divide the optical power equally, the intensity
transmitted through one output port of the interferometer J, is related to the incident
intensity I; by
I, = $1; + 1[ с0зф = I, cos*(y/2), (21.1-14)
where ф = ф1 — #2 15 the difference between the phase shifts encountered by the light
as it travels through the two interferometer branches (Sec. 2.5A). The transmittance of
the interferometer is thus J = [,/I; = cos?(y/2).
TV)
qj Branch 2 ‘ \ С
=
№— 9° po \
10 °° А,
<
Figure 21.1-4 A phase modulator placed in one branch of а Mach-Zehnder interferometer can
serve as an intensity modulator. The transmittance of the interferometer J(V) = I,/J; varies
periodically with the applied voltage V. By operating over a limited region of voltage near point
B, the device acts as a linear intensity modulator. If V is switched between points A and C, the
device serves as an optical switch.
Because of the presence of the phase modulator in branch 1, in accordance with
(21.1-7) we have фт = фь — V/V; so that y is controlled by the applied voltage У
in accordance with the linear relation ф = ф1 — ф2 = Yo —7V/V,,, where the constant

982 CHAPTER21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
Yo = Yip — $2 depends on the optical path difference. The transmittance of the device
is therefore a function of the applied voltage У,

T(V) = cos? (2 — a4 . (21.1-15)

2 2 Vn Transmittance

This function is plotted in Fig. 21.1-4 for an arbitrary value of фо. The device may be
operated as a linear intensity modulator by adjusting the optical path difference so that
фо = 1/2 and operating in the nearly linear region around J = 0.5. Alternatively,
the optical path difference may be adjusted so that yo is a multiple of 27. In that case
J(0) = 1 and J(V,) = 0, so the modulator switches the light on and off as У is
switched between 0 and V,.

A Mach-Zehnder intensity modulator may also be constructed in the form of ап
integrated-photonic device. Waveguides are placed on a substrate in the geometry
shown in Fig. 21.1-5. The beamsplitters are implemented using waveguide Y’s while
the optical input and output are carried on optical fibers. Commercially available
integrated-photonic modulators generally operate at speeds of tens of GHz.

Input a
Ske —_ Figure 21.1-5 Ап integrated-photonic in-
_— : = ^_ tensity modulator (or optical switch). А
eo Mach-Zehnder interferometer and an electro-
—_ 7 optic phase modulator are implemented using
—_ —_ J optical waveguides fabricated from a material
SS > NK such as LiNbOs3 indiffused with Ti.
_—~ Modulated
|” light Io
Intensity Modulators: Use of a Retarder Between Crossed Polarizers
As described in Sec. 6.6B, a wave retarder (of retardation Г) sandwiched between
two crossed polarizers placed at 45° with respect to the retarder’s axes (Fig. 6.6-4)
exhibits an intensity transmittance J = зш?(Г/2). If the retarder is a Pockels cell,
then Г is linearly dependent on the applied voltage У, as provided in (21.1-12). The
transmittance of the device is then a periodic function of V,
T(V) = sin? (> _ rir) , (21.1-16)
2 2 Vx Transmittance
as displayed in Fig. 21.1-6. By changing V, the transmittance can be varied between 0
(shutter closed) and 1 (shutter open). The device can also be used as a linear modulator
if the system is operated in the region near J(V) = 0.5. By selecting Го = 7/2 and
У < И, we have
доп ПИ _ ат 1 av
(И) =sin (1 5 i) = ‘Т(0) | 5 Ove (21.1-17)

21.1 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRO-OPTICS 983
as Г”
B Co LY
Polarizer 0.5 t
Polarizer
0
Ij к и у
(a) (b) t

Figure 21.1-6 (a) An optical intensity modulator using a Pockels cell placed between two crossed
polarizers. (6) Optical transmittance versus applied voltage for an arbitrary value of Го; for linear
operation the cell is biased near point B.
so that J(V) is a linear function with slope 7/2V,,, representing the sensitivity of the
modulator. The phase retardation Го can be adjusted either optically (by incorporating
an external phase retarder) or electrically (by incorporating a constant bias voltage).

In practice, the maximum transmittance of the modulator is smaller than unity
because of losses associated with reflection, absorption, and scattering. Moreover, the
minimum transmittance is greater than zero because of inadvertent misalignments of
the propagation direction and the polarization directions relative to the crystal axes and
polarizers. Nevertheless, the ratio between the maximum and minimum transmittances,
called the extinction ratio, can exceed 30 dB (1000:1).
C. Scanners
An optical beam can be deflected dynamically by using a prism with an electrically
controlled refractive index. In accordance with (1.2-7), the angle of deflection intro-
duced by a prism of small apex angle a and refractive index n is 9 = (п — Та. An
incremental change of the refractive index An caused by an applied electric field Е
via the Pockels effect results in an incremental change of the deflection angle,

Дд = aAn = —harn?E = —harn®V/d, (21.1-18)
where V is the applied voltage and d is the prism width [Fig. 21.1-7(a)]. The angle
ДО is proportional to the applied voltage У so that the incident light is scanned. It is
sometimes more convenient to place triangularly shaped electrodes that define a prism
on a rectangular crystal. Two, or several, prisms can be cascaded by alternating the
direction of the electric field, as illustrated in Fig. 21.1-7(6).

IZ
Ke о
—— о == 6
yo у

ogo” ТА ® *
Figure 21.1-7 (a) An electro-optic prism. The deflection angle 0 is controlled by the applied
voltage. (b) An electro-optic double prism.

An important parameter that characterizes a scanner is its resolution, i.e., the number
of independent spots it can scan and it turns out that electro-optic scanning is inefficient

984 CHAPTER 21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
in this respect. An optical beam of width D and wavelength Ло has an angular diver-
gence 60 = A,/D [see (4.3-7)]. To minimize that angle, the beam should be as wide
as possible, ideally covering the entire width of the prism itself. For a given maximum
voltage У corresponding to a scanned angle AO, the number of independent spots is
given by
1 3
nw AG _ porn'V/d (21.1-19)
50 Ao/D
Substituting a = L/D and У, = (d/L)(\,/rn?) then leads to
у
М = BV, (21.1-20)
from which we conclude that У = 2NV,. This is a discouraging result because it
indicates that the scanning of N independent spots requires a voltage 2№ times greater
than the half-wave voltage V,, which is generally large to begin with. As a conse-
quence, acousto-optic and mechanical scanners (Secs. 20.2B and 24.3B, respectively)
are of greater use than electro-optic scanners.

Lateral beam shift, rather than deflection, can be effected by making use of the
process of double refraction in an anisotropic crystal (Sec. 6.3E). An incident beam
is shifted parallel to itself for one polarization while undergoing no shift for the or-
thogonal polarization. This process is implemented by first passing a linearly polarized
optical beam through an electro-optic wave retarder that acts as a polarization rotator
and then passing it through the birefringent crystal, as illustrated in Fig. 21.1-8. The
electrically controlled polarization determines whether the beam is, or is not, shifted
laterally.

| _— Figure 21.1-8 A position switch
Beery optic Birefringent based on electro-optic phase retar-
polarization rotator crystal . .
dation and double refraction.
> Se
SST
D. Directional Couplers
An important application of the electro-optic effect is in controlling the coupling be-
tween two parallel waveguides in an integrated-photonic device. An electric field can
be used to transfer light from one waveguide to the other, so that the device serves as
an electrically controlled directional coupler.

The coupling of light between two parallel single-mode planar waveguides, as dis-
played in Fig. 21.1-9(a), was examined in Sec. 9.4B. It was shown there that the
optical powers carried by the two waveguides, Р1 (2) and P2(z), are periodically ex-
changed along the direction of propagation z. Two parameters govern the strength of
the coupling process: the coupling coefficient © (which depends on the dimensions,

21.1 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRO-OPTICS 985
wavelength, and refractive indices), and the mismatch of the propagation constants
ДВ = В! — В2 = 2^Ап/ Л», where An is the difference between the refractive indices
of the waveguides. If P2(0) = 0 and the waveguides are identical with ДВ = 0, then
at a distance z = Го = 7/2, known as the transfer distance or coupling length, the
power is totally transferred from waveguide 1 into waveguide 2, 1.е., P1(Zo) = 0 and
P2(Lo) = Р1(0), as illustrated in Fig. 21.1-9(a).

РК)
Я ПО ОО T
1
Palle)
PO) KP i@) „==
La. > (<)
и 0 \Br ABLy
@ % ly * ()
Figure 21.1-9 (a) Exchange of power between two parallel, weakly coupled, identical waveguides
with the same propagation constant В (AG = 0). At z = 0 all of the power resides in waveguide 1;
at z = Lp all of the power is transferred to waveguide 2. (b) Dependence of the power-transfer ratio
T = P2(Lo)/P1(0) on the phase-mismatch parameter AG Lo for АВ F 0.

For waveguides of lengths Lo with different propagation constants (АВ # 0),
the power-transfer ratio J = P2(Lo)/P1(0) is a function of the phase mismatch, as
provided in (9.4-13),

2 2

1 АВГ
те” sinc? 1+ (280) || (21.1-21)

4 2 п
where sinc(x) = sin(a) /(a). Figure 21.1-9(6) illustrates this dependence. The ratio
assumes a maximum value of unity at AG Lo = 0, decreases with increasing AG Lo,
and vanishes when ДВ Го = УЗл, at which point no optical power is transferred to
waveguide 2.

The dependence of the coupled power on the phase mismatch is the key to fabricat-
ing electrically activated directional couplers. If the mismatch АВ Lo is switched from
0 to V/3r, the power-transfer ratio switches from unity to zero. Electrical control of A
is readily achieved by making use of the Pockels electro-optic effect. An electric field
E applied to one of two, otherwise identical, waveguides alters its refractive index
by An = —5n°r Е, where г is the Pockels coefficient. This results in a phase shift
АВ Lo = An(2mLo/Xo) = —(m/Xo)n3r Е.

A typical electro-optic directional coupler has the geometry displayed in Fig. 21.1-
10. The electrodes are placed over two waveguides separated by a distance d. An
applied voltage У creates an electric field Е = V/d in one waveguide and —V/d
in the other, where d is an effective distance determined by solving the electrostatics
problem (the electric-field lines go downward at one waveguide and upward at the
other, as portrayed in the inset of Fig. 21.1-3). The refractive index is thus incre-
mented in one waveguide and decremented in the other. The result is a net refractive
index difference 2An = —п3т (У/а), corresponding to a phase mismatch ДВ Lo =
— (2т / Ло)пЗт (Lo/d)V, which is proportional to the applied voltage У.

986 CHAPTER 21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
P\O) SS м
RM. a
о —— Figure 21.1-10 Ап integrated
eS
P. (Lg)
The voltage Vo required to switch the optical power from one waveguide to the other
is that for which |ДВ Lo| = V3 7, namely
а x V3 ела
Vo = V3— = 21.1-22
° Lo 2n3r п ner’ ( )
where Lp = л/26 and © is the coupling coefficient. This is called the switching
voltage. Since |AG Lo| = УЗлт У/Щ, (21.1-21) yields
2 2
п“. 1 V
J = — sinc? 5+3 (т) (21.1-23)
4 2 и Coupling Efficiency
This equation, plotted in Fig. 21.1-11, governs the coupling of optical power in the
directional coupler as a function of the applied voltage У.
т
! Figure 21.1-11 Dependence of the coupling effi-
ciency of the directional coupler on the applied voltage
V.When У = 0, all of the optical power is coupled from
waveguide | into waveguide 2; when У = Vo, all of the
optical power remains in waveguide 1.
% Vo у
An electro-optic directional coupler is characterized Бу its coupling length Lo,
which is inversely proportional to the coupling coefficient ©, and its switching voltage
Vo, which is directly proportional to C. The key parameter is thus C, which is governed
by the geometry and refractive indices of the device (Sec. 9.4B). An integrated-
photonic directional coupler may be fabricated, for example, by indiffusing titanium
into a high-purity LiNbO3 substrate. The light beams are focused to spot sizes of a few
jum and the waveguide ends can be permanently fixed to single-mode polarization-
maintaining optical fibers (Sec. 10.2B). The switching voltage Vo is typically less than
10 V, and operating speeds reach tens of GHz. Increased bandwidths may be attained
by making use of traveling-wave versions of such devices.
ee
EXERCISE 21.1-1
Coupling-Efficiency Spectral Response. Equation (21.1-22) indicates that the switching
voltage Vo is proportional to the wavelength. Assume that the applied voltage V = Vo for a particular
value of the wavelength Ло, so that the coupling efficiency J = 0 at ,. If, instead, the incident wave
has wavelength Ло, plot the coupling efficiency J as a function of (A, — A.) /Ao. Assume that the
coupling coefficient © and the material parameters п, and г are independent of wavelength.
ee

21.1 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRO-OPTICS 987
E. Spatial Light Modulators
A spatial light modulator (SLM) is a device that modulates the intensity of light at
different positions by prescribed factors (Fig. 21.1-12). It is a planar optical element
of controllable intensity transmittance (т, у) such that the transmitted light intensity
I,(x,y) is related to the incident light intensity Г. (т, у) by the product [,(x,y) =
I(x, y)T(a, у). If the incident light is uniform (1.е., if [;(x, у) is constant), the trans-
mitted light intensity is proportional to T(x, у). The “image” J(x, у) is then imparted
to the transmitted light, much as the image stored in a transparency is “read” by uni-
formly illuminating it in a slide projector. In a spatial light modulator, however, T(x, у)
is controllable. In an electro-optic spatial light modulator the control is electrical.
y Modulated
light
Zz
Incident ret) nce Figure 21.1-12 The spatial light modulator.
nen

To construct a spatial light modulator using the electro-optic effect, some mech-
anism must be devised for creating an electric field E(x, y) that is proportional to
the desired transmittance T(x, у) at each position. This is not easy. One approach is
to place an array of transparent electrodes on small plates of electro-optic material
set between crossed polarizers and to apply to each electrode an appropriate voltage
(Fig. 21.1-13). The voltage applied to the electrode centered at position (x;, y;), 7 =
1,2,..., is made proportional to the desired value of T(x;, y;) (see Fig. 21.1-6). If the
number of electrodes is sufficiently large, the transmittance approximates T(x, у). This
system is in effect a parallel array of longitudinal electro-optic modulators operated
as intensity modulators. Though it is not practical to address a large number of such
electrodes independently, it will become clear in Sec. 21.3B that this scheme is in fact
practical for liquid-crystal spatial light modulators used for display, since the required
voltages are low.

Ч

Я с
Figure 21.1-13 An electrically addressable array of

ae = longitudinal electro-optic modulators.

Q a

Optically Addressed Electro-Optic Spatial Light Modulators
One method of optically addressing an electro-optic spatial light modulator is based on
the use of a thin layer of photoconductive material to create the electric field required
to operate the modulator (Fig. 21.1-14). The conductivity of a photoconductive mate-
rial is proportional to the intensity of light to which it is exposed (Sec. 19.2). When
illuminated by a write image with an intensity distribution Лу (т, у), a spatial pattern
of conductance G(x, y) « Iw(x,y) is created. The photoconductive layer is placed
between two electrodes that act as a capacitor. The capacitor is initially charged and
the electrical charge leakage at position (т, y) is proportional to the local conductance
G(x,y). Hence, the charge on the capacitor is reduced in those regions where the
conductance is high. The local voltage is therefore proportional to 1/G(, у) and the
corresponding electric field E(x, y) « 1/G(a,y) « 1/Iw(a, y). If the transmittance
T(a, у) [or the reflectance R(x, y)] of the modulator is proportional to the applied field,
it must be inversely proportional to the initial light intensity Iy(a, y).

988 CHAPTER 21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
Photoconductive Modulated
» material Electro-optic EZ
—_\ nail LE
S> q| light Figure 21.1-14 An optically addressed
Write РЕ . electro-optic spatial light modulator uses a
image Yi Й_ Митог photoconductive material to create a spatial
ИУ) y) т distribution of electric field that controls an
ZA Yy pe ны electro-optic material.
x
The Pockels Readout Optical Modulator
An ingenious implementation of this principle is the Pockels readout optical modu-
lator (PROM). One implementation makes use of a crystal of bismuth silicon oxide,
В11251050 (BSO), which has an unusual combination of optical and electrical proper-
ties: (1) it exhibits the Pockels electro-optic effect; (2) it is photoconductive for blue,
but not for red light; and (3) it is a good insulator in the dark. The PROM displayed
in Fig. 21.1-15 comprises a thin wafer of BSO sandwiched between two transparent
electrodes. The light to be modulated (read light) is transmitted through a polarizer,
enters the BSO layer, and is reflected by a dichroic reflector, whereupon it crosses a
second polarizer. The reflector reflects red but is transparent to blue light. The PROM
is operated as follows:
= Priming: A large potential difference (~ 4 kV) is applied to the electrodes and
the capacitor is charged (with no leakage since the crystal is a good insulator in
the dark).
= Writing: Intense blue write light with an intensity distribution Гу (x, у) illumi-
nates the crystal. As a result, a spatial pattern of conductance G(x, у) « Iw(2, у)
is created, the voltage across the crystal is selectively lowered, and the electric
field decreases proportionally at each position, so that E(x,y) « 1/С(х, у) «
1/Iw(a, у). Аз a result of the electro-optic effect, the refractive index of the BSO
is altered, and a spatial pattern of refractive-index change An(a, у) « 1/Iw(a, y)
is created and stored in the crystal.
= Reading: Uniform red light is used to read Ап(х, у) as with usual electro-optic
intensity modulators [see Fig. 21.1-6(a)] with the polarizing beamsplitter playing
the role of the crossed polarizers.
= Erasing: The refractive-index pattern is erased by illumination with a uniform
flash of blue light. The crystal is again primed by applying 4 kV, and the device is
ready for a new cycle.
Dichroic reflector .
of red light торов Polarizing
Transparent beamsplitter
electrode
esa oN Modulated
light
wee Tig | BSO | С я
ue.
ZN
| Incident read light
(red)
Figure 21.1-15 The Pockels readout optical modulator (PROM).

21.2 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 989
Incoherent-to-Coherent Optical Converters
In an optically addressed spatial light modulator, such as the PROM, the light used to
write a spatial pattern into the modulator need not be coherent since photoconductive
materials are sensitive to optical intensity. A spatial optical pattern (an image) may
therefore be written using incoherent light, and read using coherent light. This process
of real-time conversion of a spatial distribution of natural incoherent light into a pro-
portional spatial distribution of coherent light is useful in a number of optical data- and
image-processing applications.
*21.2 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA
The basic principles and applications of electro-optics were presented in a simplified
fashion in Sec. 21.1; polarization and anisotropic effects were either ignored or intro-
duced only generically. In this section a more complete analysis of the electro-optics
of anisotropic media is presented. A brief refresher of some of the important properties
of anisotropic media set forth in Sec. 6.3 is provided below.
Crystal Optics: A Brief Refresher
The optical properties of an anisotropic medium are characterized by a geometric
construction called the index ellipsoid,
> пит, =1, 4, f =1,2,8,
aj
where n;; = Пл are elements of the impermeability tensor 1] = €,€ |. If the axes
of the ellipsoid correspond to the principal axes of the medium, its dimensions
along these axes are the principal refractive indices пл, n2, and пз (Fig. 21.2-1):
x3 wy /ny + 23/пз + 23/пз = 1.
ИЗ
Index
ellipse k
nad
we NX> Figure 21.2-1 The index ellipsoid. The
> я coordinates (21, 22, 23) are the principal axes
and пл, N2, Из are the principal refractive
x indices. The refractive indices of the normal
Index modes of a wave traveling in the direction k
ellipsoid are nN, and np.
The index ellipsoid may be used to determine the polarizations and refractive
indices n, and nz of the two normal modes of a wave traveling in an arbitrary
direction in the anisotropic medium. This is accomplished by drawing a plane
perpendicular to the direction of propagation that passes through the center of the
ellipsoid. Its intersection with the ellipsoid is an ellipse whose major and minor
axes have half-lengths equal to ng and np, as described in Sec. 6.3C.

990 CHAPTER 21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
A. Pockels and Kerr Effects
When a steady electric field Е with components (£1, 2, Ёз) is applied to a crystal,
the elements of the impermeability tensor n are altered. Each of the nine elements n;;
becomes a function of Ел, Е>, and £3, 1.е., ni; = пи (Е), so that the index ellipsoid
is modified (Fig. 21.2-2). Once we know the functions 1; (Е), we can determine the
index ellipsoid and the optical properties for an arbitrary applied electric field E. The
problem is simple in principle, but the implementation is often lengthy.
Figure 21.2-2 The index ellipsoid of a crystal
is modified when a steady electric field is applied.
Each of the elements 1; (Е) is a function of the three variables E = (F), Е, Ез),
which may be expanded in a Taylor series about E = 0,
пя(В) = пу + Утик Вь + So sipB Ei, — &Л№1=1,2,3,  (21.2-1)
k kl
where 1; = 1; (0), гк = Oni /OEk, защ = 101; /ЭЕьдЕ,, and the derivatives
are evaluated at Е = 0. Equation (21.2-1) is a generalization of (21.1-3), in which т
is replaced by 33 = 27 coefficients {r;;,}, and s is replaced by 3+ = 81 coefficients
{3}. The quantities {тк} are the coefficients of the (third-rank) linear electro-
optic (Pockels) tensor, whereas the quantities {Sina} represent the coefficients of the
(fourth-rank) quadratic electro-optic (Kerr) tensor.
Symmetry
Because п is symmetric (Пу = Пя), г and $ are invariant under permutations of
the indices 7 and 1, 1.е., тук = гик and зимы = зи. Also, the coefficients зы =
50nij /OF,,0F; are invariant to permutations of К and [ (because of the invariance to
the order of differentiation), so that 8;;4; = Злк. Because of this permutation symme-
try, the nine combinations of the indices 7, 7 generate six instead of nine independent
elements. The same reduction applies to the indices К, 1. Consequently, r;;;, has 6 x 3
independent elements, whereas эл has 6 x 6 independent elements.
It is conventional to rename the pair of indices (2, 7), 7, 7 = 1,2, 3, as a single index
I =1,2,...,6 in accordance with Table 21.2-1. The pair (К, [) is similarly replaced
by an index К = 1,2,...,6, in accordance with the same rule. Thus, the elements rj;
and 5:1 are replaced by гг» and згк, respectively. For example, г12х is denoted as rez,
$1231 15 renamed s¢5, and so on. Hence, the third-rank tensor г is replaced by a6 x 3
matrix and the fourth-rank tensor s is contracted to a 6 x 6 matrix.
Table 21.2-1 Lookup table for the index J that
1 1 6 5 represents the pair of indices (7, 1).°
2 6 2 4 a
В 5 4 а “The pair (i, 7) = (3, 2), for example, is labeled Г = 4.

21.2 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 991
Crystal Symmetry
The symmetry of the crystal adds further constraints to the elements of the r and s
matrices. Some entries must be zero and others must be equal, or equal in magnitude
and opposite in sign, or related by some other rule. For centrosymmetric materials, as
an example, r vanishes altogether and only the Kerr effect is exhibited. Tabulations
of r and s, and their symmetry relations for the 32 crystallographic point groups
(of which 11 are centrosymmetric), may be found in several books referenced in the
reading list. Representative examples are provided in Tables 21.2-2 and 21.2-3.
Table 21.2-2 Pockels coefficients r;;, for several representative crystal groups.
0 0 O 0 0 0 0 —Г22 113
ооо ооо 0 122 113
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 133
41 0 0 T41 0 0 0 Т51 0
0 T41 0 0 Т41 0 T51 0 0
0 0 T41 0 0 T63 —T22 0 0
Cubic 43m Tetragonal 42m Trigonal 3m
(e.g., GaAs, CdTe, InAs) (e.g., KDP, ADP) (e.g., BBO, LiNbOs, LiTaOs)
Table 21.2-3 Kerr coefficients s; for an isotropic medium. The form of this matrix is identical to
that for the photoelasticity matrix рук for an isotropic medium, as displayed in (20.3-4).
Si 812 92 0 0 O
812 Si 92 0 0 0
s $ $ ооо
0 O 0 0 0 од
Pockels Effect
The following procedure is used to determine the optical properties of an anisotropic
medium exhibiting the Pockels effect in the presence of an electric field E:
1. Find the principal axes and principal refractive indices пл, n2, and ng in the
absence of E.
2. Find the coefficients {r;;,} from the appropriate matrix for гль, e.g., from
Table 21.2-2, by using the rule that relates I to (i, 7) provided in Table 21.2-1.
3. Determine the elements of the impermeability tensor
nig(E) = nij(0) + У тук», (21.2-2)
k
where 1; (0) is a diagonal matrix with elements 1/n7, 1/n3, and 1/n3.
4. Write the equation for the modified index ellipsoid
So nij(E) via; = 1. (21.2-3)
aj
5. Determine the principal axes of the modified index ellipsoid by diagonalization,
and find the corresponding principal refractive indices п: (Е), n2(E), and пз(Е).
6. Given the direction of light propagation, find the normal modes and their associ-
ated refractive indices from this index ellipsoid.

992 CHAPTER21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 21.2-1.  Trigonal 3m Crystals (LiNbO; and LiTaO;). Trigonal 3m crystals are
uniaxial (ny = ng = По; Пз = Пе) with the matrix г provided in Table 21.2-2. Assuming that
Е = (0,0, Е), 1.е., that the electric field points along the optic axis (see Fig. 21.2-3), the modified
index ellipsoid is readily shown to be
1 кз (aj +22) + 1 dns) 22 =1 (21.2-4)
ne Т13 ry X95 ne T33 31. .2-
This is an ellipsoid of revolution whose principal axes are not altered when the electric field is applied.
The ordinary and extraordinary indices, n,(F) and п. (Е), respectively, are given by
1 1
=~ = = E 21.2-5
(Е) = п? +113 ( )
1 Е + гззЕ (21.2-6)
= Тзз и. .2-
п (Е) п
Because the terms г1зЁ and гзз Е in (21.2-5) and (21.2-6) are small, we use the Taylor-series approx-
imation (1 + A)~'/? = 1 — 3A, valid for |A| < 1, to obtain
No(E) = по — kn3ri3E (21.2-7)
п. (Е) = пе — 1тётззЕ. (21.2-8)
Note the similarity between these equations and the generic equation (21.1-4). We conclude that when
an electric field is applied along the optic axis of this uniaxial crystal it remains uniaxial with the same
principal axes, as illustrated in Fig. 21.2-3, but its refractive indices are modified in accordance with
(21.2-7) and (21.2-8).
Хз
< п
Чаи» По №
An
x Zl Г, пЗиЗЕ
Figure 21.2-3 Modification of the index ellipsoid of a trigonal 3m crystal such as LiNbO3 that
results from the application of a steady electric field along the direction of the optic axis.
EXAMPLE 21.2-2. Tetragonal 42m Crystals (КОР and ADP). Carrying out the same
process for this class of uniaxial crystals, and assuming that the electric field points along the optic
axis (Fig. 21.2-4), we obtain the following equation for the index ellipsoid,
2 2 2
a+ + 3 + 263 Baya, =1, (21.2-9)
Ц. Ne
where the factor of two results because {1,7 = 1,2}. The modified principal axes are obtained
by rotating the coordinate system 45° about the z axis. Substituting 2” = (a + #2)/V2, 2 =
(21 — 12)/У2, x = x3 in (21.2-9), so that a? + a? = 2? + 22 and al? — wh? = 2x12, and
relabeling the new principal axes as (71, v2, хз), leads to
2 2 2
Bal v9 v3
+4 + =1, (21.2-10)
ni(B) п5(Е)  n3(B)

21.2 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 993
“er вв 1 + г6зЕ — 1 Е (Е) (21.2-11)
= — т = -г n = Пе- ‚=
т(Е) т’ (BE) т “’ °
Cross-multiplying and using the Taylor-series approximation (1 + A)~'/? =1— 3A yields
т (Е) = то — тпотозЕ (21.2-12)
п2(Е) = по + 1пзтвзЕ (21.2-13)
пз(Е) = пе. (21.2-14)
We conclude that in this case the originally uniaxial crystal takes on а biaxial character when sub-
jected to an electric field in the direction of its optic axis, as illustrated in Fig. 21.2-4.
z хз
3 2 Ne
© LIN
/ м
f \
/ \
i
р a ae
\~ ee, | №
\ ‘о 1
м \ и’ |
ji 1,3
Z| 7% ro3E
Figure 21.2-4 Modification of the index ellipsoid resulting from the application of a steady electric
field Е along the direction of the optic axis of a uniaxial tetragonal 42m crystal such as КОР.
EXAMPLE 21.2-3. Cubic 43m Crystals (GaAs, CdTe, and InAs). Assuming that the
applied electric field points along a cubic axis of the material (taken as the z direction in Fig. 21.2-5),
the index ellipsoid for these isotropic crystals (ny = п2 = пз = п) becomes
2 2 2
Зо Ель = 1, (21.2-15)
n
where rg3 assumes the value r4; (see Table 21.2-2). As in Example 21.2-2, the new principal axes are
rotated 45° about the z axis and the principal refractive indices turn out to be
ny (EB) en - snr Е (21.2-16)
п2(Е) = n+ 5п3га Е (21.2-17)
пз(Е) = п. (21.2-18)
The applied electric field thus causes the isotropic crystal to behave in biaxial fashion (Fig. 21.2-5).
< X3h 2»
=m
и
‚Я Ww
{= с > ~
\ Ls:
У \Q Li :
Xx №. a
| al ike
< Z| к 1 из 741
Figure 21.2-5 Modification of the index ellipsoid as a result of applying a steady electric Неа Е
along a cubic axis of a 43m crystal such as GaAs.
ини |

994 CHAPTER 21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
Though cubic crystals have isotropic linear optical properties, they have well-
defined crystal axes. Two cubic crystals belonging to different point groups can
thus exhibit different optical properties in the presence of a steady electric field.
For example, cubic crystals with the m3m diamond-structure, such as Si and Ge, are
centrosymmetric and exhibit no Pockels effect whereas 43m cubic crystals, such as
GaAs and InAs, exhibit anisotropic optical properties, as is clear from Example 21.2-3.
For initially anisotropic materials in which the applied electric field does not alter
the principal axes, as in Example 21.2-1, the polarizations of the normal modes remain
the same, but their associated refractive indices become dependent on Е. The medium
can then be conveniently used as a phase modulator, wave retarder, or intensity mod-
ulator, in accordance with the generic theory provided in Sec. 21.1B. This principle is
described further in Sec. 21.2B.
Kerr Effect
The optical properties of a Kerr medium can be determined by making use of the same
procedure used for the Pockels medium, except that the coefficients n;;(E) obey
nig (E) = пи (0) + У sje Ex Et. (21.2-19)
kl
«И
EXAMPLE 21.2-4. Kerr Effect т ап [зотор/с Medium. With а steady applied electric field
Е pointing along the z direction, we use the Kerr coefficients for an isotropic medium s;x% provided
in Table 21.2-3 to find the equation for the index ellipsoid,
1+. Е? | (21 +23) + 1+, Е? | 22 =1 (21.2-20)
me 12 1 2 ne 11 з=1. .
This is the equation of an ellipsoid of revolution whose optic axis is the z axis, along the direction of
the applied electric field. The principal refractive indices n,(E) and п. (Е) are determined from
1 1
= Е? 21.2-21
(Е) т? + 812 ( )
1 1
= Е?. 21.2-22
"2(Е) we + S11 ( )
Since the rightmost terms in (21.2-21) and (21.2-22) are small, we again make use of the approxima-
tion (1 + А)- 1/2 = 1 — 4A to obtain
т(Е) = п — 113812? (21.2-23)
п. (Е) =п- 112331 Е”. (21.2-24)
Thus, a steady electric field Е applied to an initially isotropic medium causes it to behave as a uniaxial
crystal with the optic axis along the direction of the electric field. In this case, the ordinary and
extraordinary indices are quadratically decreasing functions of Е.
ПОНИ
В. Modulators
The principles of phase and intensity modulation using the electro-optic effect were
outlined in Sec. 21.1B. Anisotropic effects were introduced only generically. Using
the anisotropic theory presented in this section, the generic parameters r and s used

21.2 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF ANISOTROPIC MEDIA 995
in Sec. 21.1 can be explicitly determined for any crystal, for arbitrary electric-field
and light-propagation directions. We restrict our discussion to Pockels modulators, but
the same approach is applicable for Kerr modulators. For simplicity, we assume that
the direction of the electric field is such that the principal axes of the crystal are not
altered. We also assume that the direction of the wave relative to these axes is such that
the planes of polarization of the normal modes are not altered by the presence of the
electric field.

Phase Modulators
A normal mode is characterized by a refractive index n(E) = n—4rn3E, where п and
r are the appropriate refractive index and Pockels coefficient, respectively, and where
Е =V/d is the electric field obtained by applying a voltage У across a distance d. A
wave traveling a distance Г, undergoes a phase shift
ф=Фо-лУ/У, , (21.2-25)
where фо = 2anL/Xo, and the half-wave voltage is
а Xo
in agreement with (21.1-7) and (21.1-8), respectively. The appropriate coefficients
generically referred to as n and r can be readily determined in specific cases, as
demonstrated in the following example.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 21.2-5. Trigonal 3m Crystals (LiNbO; and МТаО.). When an electric field
is directed along the optic axis of this class of uniaxial crystal, the crystal remains uniaxial with
the same principal axes, as shown in Example 21.2-1. The principal refractive indices are given by
(21.2-7) and (21.2-8). The crystal can be used as a phase modulator in either of two configurations:
Longitudinal Modulator: Га linearly polarized optical wave travels along the direction of the
optic axis (parallel to the electric field), the appropriate parameters for the phase modulator are
п = No, г = 113, and а = Г. For LiNbO3, r13 = 9.6 pm/V and п» = 2.3 at A, = 633 nm.
Equation (21.2-26) then yields V, = 5.41 kV, the voltage required to change the phase by т.
Transverse Modulator: If the wave travels in the x direction and is polarized in the z direction, the
appropriate parameters aren = п. and r = гзз. The width d is generally not equal to the length
L. For LiNbOs at A, = 633 nm, гзз = 30.9 pm/V and п. = 2.2, which results in a half-wave
voltage У, = 1.9(d/L) КУ. If d/L = 0.1, we obtain V, = 190 V, which is significantly lower
than the half-wave voltage for the longitudinal modulator.
«ПИ
Intensity Modulators
The difference in the dependence of the refractive indices of the two normal modes of
a Pockels cell on the applied field provides a voltage-dependent retardation,
Г = Го -7V/V,, (21.2-27)
where Го = 2” (my — n2)L/Xo (21.2-28)
d А
Vz == (21.2-29)
Г ти — rans
in agreement with (21.1-12) and (21.1-13). If the cell is placed between crossed po-
larizers, the system serves as an intensity modulator (Sec. 21.1B). It is not difficult to
determine the appropriate indices пл and ng, and coefficients r; and го, as illustrated
by Example 21.2-6.

996  CHAPTER21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 21.2-6. Tetragonal 42m Crystals (КОР and ADP). As described in Ехат-
ple 21.2-2, when an electric field is applied along the optic axis of this uniaxial crystal, it behaves
as a biaxial crystal. The new principal axes are the original axes rotated by 45° about the optic axis.
Assume a longitudinal modulator configuration (d/L = 1) in which the wave travels along the optic
axis. The two normal modes have refractive indices given by (21.2-12) and (21.2-13). The appropriate
coefficients to be used in (21.2-29) are thus ny = no = По, Г1 = 163, To = —Гбз, and d = Г, so that
Го = 0 and
Ао
У = =. 21.2-30
2r63n3 ( )
For КОР at A, = 633 nm, У, = 8.4 kV.
«ПИ
ee
EXERCISE 21.2-1
Intensity Modulation Using the Kerr Effect. Use (21.2-23) and (21.2-24) to determine an
expression for the phase shift ~ and the phase retardation Г in a longitudinal Kerr modulator made
of an isotropic material, as functions of the applied voltage V. Derive expressions for the half-wave
voltages V,, in each case.
ee
21.3 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS

As described in Sec. 6.5, the elongated molecules of nematic liquid crystals tend to
have ordered orientations that are altered when the material is subjected to mechanical
or electric forces. Because of their unique anisotropic properties, liquid crystals can
serve as dynamic wave retarders or polarization rotators. The presence of an electric
field modifies their molecular orientation, so that their effect on polarized light is
altered. Liquid crystals can therefore be used as electrically controlled optical wave
retarders, modulators, and switches. These devices are particularly useful in display
technology.
A. Wave Retarders and Modulators
Electrical Properties of Nematic Liquid Crystals
The liquid crystals used to make electro-optic devices are usually of sufficiently low
conductivity that they can be regarded as ideal dielectric materials. Because of the elon-
gated shape of the constituent molecules and their ordered orientation, liquid crystals
have anisotropic dielectric properties with uniaxial symmetry. The electric permittivity
is defined аз | for electric fields pointing along the long axes of the molecules and as
Е. for fields pointing in the perpendicular direction. Liquid crystals for which «| > €
(positive uniaxial) are usually selected for electro-optic applications.

The application of a steady (or low frequency) electric field to a liquid crystal
induces electric dipoles in its molecules and the resultant electric forces exert torques
on them. The molecules rotate in a direction such that the free electrostatic energy,
—5E-D = —3{e, Е? +в, Е? + «| Е], is minimized (here, Ел, E2, and Ез are the
components of Е in the directions of the principal axes). Since «| > в, for a given
direction of the electric field, minimum energy is achieved when the molecules are

21.3 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS 997
aligned with the field. In that case EF, = Е5 = 0, so that Е = (0,0, Е), and the free
energy is — $e E”. When alignment is complete, the long molecular axes point in the
direction of the electric field, as portrayed in Fig. 21.3-1. A reversal of the electric
field results in the same molecular rotation and an alternating field generated by an AC
voltage also has the same effect.

Figure 21.3-1 The molecules of a positive uniaxial liquid
> crystal rotate зо their long molecular axes align with the
applied electric field.
Nematic Liquid-Crystal Wave Retarders and Modulators
A nematic liquid-crystal cell is a thin layer of nematic liquid crystal placed between
two parallel glass plates and rubbed so that the molecules are parallel to each other.
The material then acts as a uniaxial crystal with the optic axis parallel to the molecular
orientation. For waves traveling in the z direction (perpendicular to the glass plates),
the normal modes are linearly polarized in the x and у directions (parallel and perpen-
dicular to the molecular directions, respectively), as illustrated in Fig. 21.3-2(a). The
principal refractive indices are then the extraordinary and ordinary indices, п. and no,
respectively. A cell of thickness d provides a wave retardation Г = 27(ne — по) d/o.
x xX
| | й 7’,
ill il hy yy
МИ ГОДА
mt | жити | yyy, Uy
ТИ ИИ ТИ tnt! Wy YY
|! | WN | | ИИ ПИЯ р yh ff y
dill Wi с ИИА Ya
yy | Y Y z
y a y
(a) Untilted state (b) Tilted state
Figure 21.3-2 Molecular orientation of a liquid-crystal cell: (a) in the absence of a steady electric
field; (b) in the presence of a steady electric field. The optic axis lies along the direction of the long
axes of the molecules.

Now, if an electric field is applied in the z direction (by applying a voltage V across
transparent conductive electrodes coated on the insides of the glass plates), the resultant
electric forces tend to tilt the molecules toward alignment with the field, but the elastic
forces at the surfaces of the glass plates resist this motion. When the applied electric
field is sufficiently strong, however, most of the molecules (except for those adjacent
to the glass surfaces) tilt toward the z axis. The equilibrium tilt angle 6 (with respect
to the x—-y) plane for these molecules is a monotonically increasing function of У
characterized by’

0 Уи
0=4 7 V-Y. (21.3-1)
— — 2tan7!|exp{ ————* УИ,
where У is the applied RMS voltage, И. is a critical voltage at which the tilting process
begins, and Vo is a constant. When (У — V.)/Vo = 1, we find that 0 == 50°. As
(У — V.)/Vo increases beyond unity, 9 approaches 90° as shown in Fig. 21.3-3(a).

1 See, e.g., Р. Ц. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals, Oxford University Press, 2nd ed.

1993.

998 — СНАРТЕВ21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
90° 1
и _ |
Tax
05 ; An=0.1
\ 02
(@) 9 () 0 ——

0 1 2 3 (V-V,)/Vo 0 1 2 3 (V-V,)/Vo
Figure 21.3-3 (a) Dependence of the tilt angle 6 of the liquid-crystal molecules on the normalized
RMS voltage applied to the liquid-crystal cell. (b) Dependence of the normalized retardation
Г/Гиах = [n(0) — no] / (пе — по) on the normalized RMS voltage when п» = 1.5, for the values of
An = ne — по indicated. This plot is obtained from (21.3-1) and (21.3-2).

When the electric field is removed, the orientations of the molecules near the glass
plates are reasserted and all of the molecules tilt back to their original orientations, in
planes parallel to the plates. In a sense, the liquid-crystal material may be viewed as a
liquid with memory.
For a tilt angle 0, the normal modes of an optical wave traveling in the z direction
are polarized in the x and у directions and have refractive indices п(0) and по, where
1 cos?@ sin? 6
726) из + ne (21.3-2)
Note that for a tilt angle 0, the direction between the optic axis and the direction of
propagation is 90° — 9, which explains why (21.3-2) differs from (6.3-15).
The liquid-crystal cell finds use in a number of applications:
= Phase modulator. For an optical wave traveling in the z direction that is linearly
polarized in the x direction (parallel to the untilted molecular orientation), the
phase shift 15 ф = 27n(@)d/A,, where п(0) is given by (21.3-2). Since @ is
controlled by the voltage applied to the cell in accordance with (21.3-1), the cell
can be readily used as a voltage-controlled phase modulator.
= Variable wave retarder. The retardation Г = 27[n(0) — по|а/Ло also depends
on the tilt angle 9. It achieves its maximum value Гиах = 27 (пе —No)d/Ao when
the molecules are not tilted (9 = 0) and decreases monotonically toward 0 when
the tilt angle reaches 90°. Using (21.3-2) and (21.3-1), the dependence of Г on
the applied voltage is plotted in Fig. 21.3-3(b). The liquid-crystal cell therefore
serves as a voltage-controlled wave retarder with principal axes along the x and y
directions.
= Intensity modulator. When the liquid-crystal cell is placed between two crossed
polarizers (at +45° with respect to the x axis in the x-y plane), the transmittance
of the device is J = sin?(I'/2), which is a function of the voltage-controlled
retardation Г and has a maximum value of unity when the retardation is 7. Since
the retardation is voltage dependent, so too is the transmittance so that the device
functions as a voltage-controlled intensity modulator. Intensity modulation may

also be implemented in reflection mode by placing the cell between a mirror and a

polarizer oriented at 45° with respect to the x-axis, as illustrated in Fig. 21.3-4(a),

in which case the reflectance is controlled by the applied voltage. A sketch of the
reflectance versus the applied voltage is provided in Fig. 21.3-4(6).

21.3 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS 999
x у
Polarizer | © . 1
Incident Nm Mirror
a
_> К
WVMNNUUNNI
OFF
== LC
Rent — ~
№ ) % Ve Vo у
(a) » (6)
Figure 21.3-4 (a) A nematic liquid-crystal cell placed between a polarizer and a mirror functions
as a reflector with voltage-controllable reflectance. The retardation Г varies between 7/2 and 0 as the
voltage is tuned between 0 (“ОЕЕ” state) and the saturation voltage Vo (“ON” state). After reflection
from the mirror and a round trip through the crystal, the plane of polarization rotates 90° in the “OFF”
state, so that the light is blocked. In the “ON” state, there is no rotation, and the reflected light is
transmitted by the polarizer. (b) Dependence of the intensity reflectance on the applied voltage V.
Liquid-Crystal Cell Parameters
Liquid-crystal cells are usually sealed between antireflection-coated, optically flat,
glass windows. Liquid-crystal layers have typical thicknesses 4 = 10 ит and а
refractive-index difference An = пе — по in the vicinity of 0.1-0.3. The retardation
Г = 27¢@/.z is often expressed in terms of the retardance о = (ne — по) d; retardances
of several hundred nanometers are typical (e.g., a retardance of 300 nm corresponds to
a retardation of 7 at A, = 600 nm). The response time of a liquid crystal layer depends
on its thickness, as well as on the viscosity of the material, its temperature, and the
nature of the applied drive voltage. Liquid-crystal cells are slow devices; the rise time
is of the order of tens of milliseconds if the operating voltage is near the critical
voltage У, and roughly a few milliseconds at higher voltages. The critical voltage V, is
typically a few volts RMS. The decay time is insensitive to the operating voltage but
can be reduced by using cells of smaller thickness. The voltage is usually applied as
a square waveform with a frequency that ranges between tens of Hz and a few kHz.
Operation at lower frequencies tends to cause electromechanical effects that disrupt
molecular alignment and reduce the lifetime of the device, while frequencies higher
than 100 Hz entail greater power consumption because of increased conductivity.
Twisted Nematic Liquid-Crystal Modulators
A twisted nematic liquid-crystal cell is a thin layer of nematic liquid crystal placed be-
tween two parallel glass plates and rubbed in such a way that the molecular orientation
rotates helically about an axis normal to the plates (the axis of twist). If the angle of
twist is 90°, for example, the molecules point in the т direction at one plate and in the
y direction at the other [Fig. 21.3-5(a)]. Consecutive transverse layers of the material
act as uniaxial crystals with an optic axis that rotates helically about the axis of twist. It
was demonstrated in Sec. 6.5 that the plane of polarization for linearly polarized light
traveling along the direction of the axis of twist rotates with the molecules, so that the
cell acts as a polarization rotator.

When an electric field is applied along the direction of the axis of twist (the z
direction) the molecules tilt toward the field [Fig. 21.3-5(6)]. When the tilt is 90°,
the molecules lose their twisted character (except for those adjacent to the glass sur-
faces), whereupon the polarization rotatory power is deactivated. If the electric field is
removed, the orientations of the layers near the glass surfaces dominate, causing the

1000 CHAPTER21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
molecules to return to their original twisted state and the polarization rotatory power
to be regained.
*t OFF *4 _ ОМ
7 Е
ha? if SS =. —=s

IW GE Е

Е Е

|| = Е

И = z SSS 5

|7 а ИА

WHE _——-

y sy
(a) Twisted state (b) Tilted (untwisted) state

Figure 21.3-5 (a) A twisted nematic liquid-crystal cell in its twisted state. (b) In the presence of
a sufficiently strong electric field, the molecules tilt in the direction of the field and lose their twisted
character.

Since the polarization rotatory power may be turned off and on by switching the
electric field on and off, a shutter can be designed by placing a cell providing a 90°
twist between two crossed polarizers. The system then transmits light in the absence
of an electric field and blocks it when the electric field is applied, as portrayed in
Fig. 21.3-6.

OFF ON
Polarizer (~) Polarizer Polarizer (~) a .
oe Polarizer
Th Uy ir nN in === ==
we si 4 we —— =
ИИ JGE | Е
| й = (=> —= = 3S
НИМИ = z — == А
ИИ Е ——
Ui я ЕЕ
(а) (b)

Figure 21.3-6 A twisted nematic liquid-crystal modulator. (a) When the electric field is absent,
the liquid-crystal cell acts as a polarization rotator and the light is transmitted. (6) When the electric
field is present, the cell’s rotatory power is suspended and the light is blocked. At intermediate values
of the applied voltage, the device provides partial intensity transmission and therefore operates as an
analog intensity modulator.
The twisted liquid-crystal cell placed between crossed polarizers may also be operated
as an analog modulator. Intermediate tilt angles result in a combination of polari-
zation rotation and wave retardation. The analysis of the transmission of polarized light
through tilted and twisted molecules is rather complex, but the overall effect is partial
intensity transmittance. There is an approximately linear range of transition between
the total transmission of the fully twisted (untilted) state and the total blocking of the
fully tilted (untwisted) state, although the dynamic range is rather limited.

Operation in the reflective mode is also possible, as illustrated in Fig. 21.3-7. Here,
the twist angle is 45°; a mirror is placed on one side of the cell and a polarizer on the
other side. When the electric field is absent the polarization plane rotates a total of 90°
as the wave propagates a round trip through the cell; the reflected light is therefore
blocked by the polarizer. When the electric field is present, the polarization rotatory
power is suspended and the reflected light is transmitted through the polarizer. Other
reflective and transmissive modes of operation with different angles of twist are also
possible.

21.3 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS 1001
OFE
ON
Polarizer ©) Mirror
ii =a
WZ
OFF
<— LC
Figure 21.3-7 A twisted nematic liquid-crystal cell with a 45° twist angle and a mirror provides
a round-trip polarization rotation of 90° in the absence of the electric field (blocked state) and no
rotation when the field is applied (unblocked state). The device is a reflective switch. Much as with
the nematic liquid-crystal cell illustrated in Fig. 21.3-4, this device can be operated as a reflective
analog intensity modulator for intermediate values of the field.
Ferroelectric Liquid Crystals
Smectic liquid crystals are organized in layers, as displayed in Fig. 6.5-1(b). In the
smectic-C phase, the molecular orientation is tilted by an angle 9 with respect to the
normal to the parallel smectic layers (the x axis), as illustrated in Fig. 21.3-8. This
material has ferroelectric properties. When placed between two closely spaced glass
plates the surface interactions permit only two stable states of molecular orientation:
at the angles +6, as shown in Fig. 21.3-8. When an electric field +F is applied in the
z direction, a torque is produced that switches the molecular orientation into the stable
state +6 [Fig. 21.3-8(a)]. The molecules can be switched into the state —0 by applying
an electric field —F of the opposite polarity [Fig. 21.3-8(b)]. The cell therefore acts as
a uniaxial crystal whose optic axis may be switched between two orientations.
x 0 x 9
|1
\\\
9 9 9 \\\
| \\ |
Wy
Z А Z
М \\
\\\y
(a) У (Б) У
Figure 21.3-8 The two allowed states of a ferroelectric liquid-crystal cell.

In the geometry of Fig. 21.3-8, the incident light is linearly polarized at an angle 0
with respect to the x axis. In the +6 state at left, the polarization is parallel to the optic
axis and the wave travels with the extraordinary refractive index пе without retardation.
In the —9 state at right, the polarization makes an angle 20 with the optic axis. If 20 =
45°, the wave undergoes a retardation Г = 2” (пе — по) а / Ло, where d is the thickness
of the cell and по is the ordinary refractive index. If d is selected such that Г = л, the
device acts as a half-wave retarder and the plane of polarization is rotated by 90°, as
illustrated in Fig. 6.1-8(b). Hence, reversing the applied electric field has the effect of
rotating the plane of polarization by 90°. A switch is therefore readily constructed by
placing this cell between two crossed polarizers. The principal merit of ferroelectric
liquid-crystal switches lies in their fast response times at room temperature. Their jus
response times are far faster than the ms response times associated with nematic liquid
crystals. The switching voltage is on the order of +10 V.

1002 CHAPTER21 ELECTRO-OPTICS

B. Spatial Light Modulators and Displays

Spatial light modulators (SLMs) modify the spatial distribution of the wavefront
(phase), intensity, or polarization of an optical wave by making use of an array of
optical modulators arranged in a particular spatial configuration. Wavefront modulation
is used for beam steering and focusing, as well as in adaptive optics. The principal
application of intensity modulation is for the display of spatial patterns, such as
numbers, letters, graphics, and images. Liquid-crystal technology is widely used in
SLMs and liquid-crystal displays (LCDs) are dominant in applications such as
mobile phones, digital watches, laptop and desktop computers, and flat panel and
high-definition television receivers.

LCDs are designed to operate either in a transmissive mode (T-mode), as in the
configuration depicted in Fig. 21.3-6, or in a reflective mode (R-mode), as exemplified
in Fig. 21.3-7. T-mode LCDs rely on a backlight placed at the rear of the device; the
emitted light is transmitted through the liquid-crystal cell and is viewed from the front
of the device. The backlight generally consists of a panel of white LEDs or WOLEDs
(Sec. 18.1F), or a cold-cathode fluorescent lamp; the emitted light is rendered spatially
uniform with the help of a diffuser. The images in R-mode LCDs are usually generated
using the reflection of ambient light from the device. R-mode devices thus have the
dual merits of low power consumption and superior readability at high ambient light
levels (such as outdoors), but they cannot be used in the dark. Transreflective devices
that can operate in either mode are available.

LCDs make use of nematic, twisted-nematic, or ferroelectric liquid-crystal cells
(Sec. 21.3A). The configuration most commonly used in laptop computers and high-
definition television receivers is the 90° twisted-nematic transmissive configuration
(Fig. 21.3-6), principally because it offers high contrast. The contrast of LCDs typically
degrades significantly as the angle of view increases, in part because oblique rays
undergo different retardation at different angles of incidence/reflection, particularly
when the molecules are rotated in an out-of-plane direction. Special compensation
filters have been developed for wide-angle viewing.

Segmented LCD
A segmented LCD is constructed by placing transparent electrodes in a particular
configuration on the glass plate of a reflective liquid-crystal cell. Applying a voltage
to selected electrodes (with respect to a common electrode at the rear of the device)
results in the desired pattern of reflection and nonreflection. As an example, a seven-
segment electrode configuration suitable for displaying the numerals 0 to 9 is illustrated
in Fig. 21.3-9. Larger numbers of electrodes may be addressed sequentially, such as by
the use of a charge-coupled configuration (Sec. 19.5).

electrode Figure 21.3-9 Electrodes of a seven-bar-segment

Segment reflective-mode LCD.

electrode
Matrix LCD
A matrix LCD [Fig. 21.3-10(a)] makes use of transparent electrodes arranged in the
form of rows and columns, with pixels defined by the locations of their intersec-
tions. Each pixel functions much like the single liquid-crystal modulator illustrated
in Fig. 21.3-6. The image information is imparted via voltages applied across the

21.3 ELECTRO-OPTICS OF LIQUID CRYSTALS 1003
transparent electrodes of each pixel, which in turn determine the tilt angles of their
liquid-crystal layers and thence the intensities of the light they transmit. The resolution
of the device is determined by the pixel density.

Given a passive-matrix LCD with N rows and M columns, an external wire is
required to address each of the NM pixels, at least in principle. Since this is not
feasible for large arrays, in practice only the rows and columns are addressed, requiring
N+ М external wires. Crosstalk among the pixels is minimized by entering the image
sequentially over a time period T that is shorter than the response time of the viewer’s
visual system. This period is divided into N intervals; the N rows are sequentially
scanned with an applied voltage, while the image data are entered by applying a
positive or negative voltage to each of the М columns, depending on the desired image.
A schematic of the system and its operation is presented in Fig. 21.3-10.

Data lines rv
an . " 1 03 я пя
lining — ми м МАИ
о р
oo Мм
52 |
53
@ (в) ©
Figure 21.3-10 (а) А matrix LCD is addressed by applying sequential scanning (5) voltage pulses
to the rows, and data (D) voltage pulses to the columns. (b) Image obtained by applying to the rows
and columns the voltage-pulse sequences displayed in (c).

A binary image with dark and bright pixels, such as that displayed in Fig. 21.3-10(6)
may be entered into a matrix LCD by means of the following scheme: During the nth
time interval, a voltage (1 — r)V is applied to the nth row (У is a constant voltage
and г < 1), while all other rows are maintained at 0 У. Concurrently, a voltage —rV
is applied to the mth column if the (m, 7) pixel is to be bright, and +rV is applied if
it is to be dark. The voltage applied to the (m,n) pixel during the nth time interval is
therefore (l—r)V—(—rV) = V if the pixel is bright, and (1—r)V—(rV) = (1—2r)V
if it is dark. During the other № — 1 time intervals, the voltage applied to the (m,n)
pixel is either 0 — (—rV) = rV or 0 — (rV) = —rV. The LCD is responsive to the
RMS voltage Узм5 averaged over the sequence of № intervals. For the (m,n) pixel,
Veg = (1/N)[V? + (М — 1)r?V?] if the pixel is bright, and У2,. = (1/N)[(1 —
2r)?V? + (N — 1)r?V?| if it is dark. The ratio of these two voltages is maximum if
r=1/ (ИМ + 1), in which case Ум» in the bright state is greater than that in the
dark states by the factor [(/N + 1)/(ММ — 1)]'/?. Though this ratio is only slightly
greater than unity, small changes in the applied voltage can switch the pixel from dark
to bright because of the nonlinear relation between the transmittance and the applied
voltage. Nevertheless, this type of passive addressing system is clearly not adequate if
N is too large.

Active-Matrix LCD (AMLCD)

The AMLCD eliminates pixel-to-pixel crosstalk by making use of thin-film transistor
(TFT) circuitry. As illustrated in Fig. 21.3-11, each pixel is coupled to its own TFT,
gated by a signal from its row wire, while the data are entered via its column wire.
When the gate signal is present, the TFT applies a voltage V between the indium-
tin-oxide (ITO) pixel electrode and an ITO common electrode during a time duration

1004  CHAPTER21 ELECTRO-OPTICS

T/N, where T is the frame period and N is the number of rows. Since the data are
entered row by row, crosstalk is eliminated. Though the voltage applied on each pixel
appears only during the brief frame time, the viewer perceives the image in its totality
since the integration time of the human visual system is long (of the order of ms) in
comparison with the frame time.

Figure 21.3-11 illustrates the structure and operation of an AMLCD in the T-mode
configuration. The liquid-crystal (LC) material is sandwiched between two thin glass
plates with a single ITO common electrode on one side of it and the ITO pixel electrode
array on the other side. The stack is placed between a pair of crossed polarizer sheets
that form the display screen. Color display is implemented by segmenting each pixel
into three independently addressed adjacent segments (sub-pixels) with red, green, and
blue color filters in front, as shown in Fig. 21.3-11(6). With white backlight illuminat-
ing the array, the color displayed by each pixel is determined by the superposition of
the light transmitted through its three sub-pixels. Metameric white light is produced
via additive color mixing, as described in Sec. 18.1F.

р М rye. pt To ОО
— Slectrode Ubstrate 01
| встр, ООС я ПОНИ
и | l| Sota Ш О
Data buy OP — “a В За — a e———_IT 1.
“s 03 Ba Polari, .
@) - “er © @
Figure 21.3-11 An active-matrix liquid-crystal display (AMLCD). (a) Device structure viewed
from the rear. Pixels are addressed via thin-film transistors (TFTs) gated by signals (G) applied from
the rows and data (D) entered via the columns. The white backlight is not shown. (b) Adjacent color
filters placed between the common electrode and substrate provide color sub-pixels. (c) Black-and-
white image obtained by applying the gating and data waveforms displayed in (d). The electrodes are
fabricated from indium tin oxide (ITO), a transparent conductor.
Optical phase-modulation SLMs, widely used for applications such as wavefront modi-
fication and the reshaping of optical beams, often make use of liquid-crystal-on-silicon
technology, and are typically configured in the reflective mode.

A competing display technology makes use of TFT circuitry to control arrays of
organic light-emitting diodes. The color sub-pixels in an active-matrix organic light-
emitting display (AMOLED) are created by OLEDs that directly emit red, green, and
blue light (Sec. 18.1E), or by WOLEDs that emit white OLED light that is passed
through color filters. AMOLEDs have a number of salutary features in comparison with
AMLCDs: they are 1) thinner, 2) flexible, 3) superior in color rendition, 4) superior
in contrast, 5) insensitive to viewing angle, and 6) faster. However, they are more
expensive in the current state of their development.

Optically Addressed Spatial Light Modulators

Most LCDs are addressed electrically. However, optically addressed spatial light mod-
ulators are attractive for applications involving image and optical data processing.
Light with an intensity distribution Гу (a, у), the “write” image, is converted by an
optoelectronic sensor into an electric-field distribution E(x, y), which controls the
reflectance R(x, у) of a liquid-crystal cell operated in the reflective mode. A separate
optical wave of uniform intensity is reflected from the device and creates the “read”

21.4 PHOTOREFRACTIVITY 1005
image I(x, y) «x R(x, у). Thus, the “read” image is controlled by the “write” image
(Fig. 21.1-14).

If the write image is carried by incoherent light, and the read image is formed by
coherent light, the device serves as a spatial incoherent-to-coherent light converter,
much like the PROM device discussed earlier (Sec. 21.1E). Furthermore, the wave-
lengths of the write and read beams need not be the same. The read light may also be
more intense than the write light, so that the device may serve as an image intensifier.

There are several ways of converting the write image Iw(«,y) into a pattern of
electric field E(x, у) for application to the liquid-crystal cell. A layer of photocon-
ductive material, e.g., cadmium sulfide (CdS), placed between the electrodes of a
capacitor may be used. When illuminated by the distribution Iw (x, у), the conductance
G(x, у) is altered proportionally. The capacitor is then discharged at each position in
accordance with the local conductance, so that the resultant voltage and electric field
E(x,y) х 1/Iw(2,y) is a negative of the original image. An alternative makes use
of a sheet photodiode [e.g., a p-i-n photodiode of hydrogenated amorphous silicon
(a-Si:H)]. The reverse-biased photodiode conducts in the presence of light, thereby
creating a potential difference proportional to the local light intensity.

An example of a commercially available liquid-crystal spatial light modulator
(SLM) is the Parallel-Aligned Spatial Light Modulator (PAL-SLM) illustrated in
Fig. 21.3-12. This device uses a-Si:H as the write medium and a nematic LC with
molecules in parallel alignment as a phase modulator. At each point, the impedance
of the amorphous silicon layer is altered by the write light and a voltage proportional
to the optical intensity is applied to the corresponding point in the LC layer. This
results in rotation of the anisotropic LC molecules to align with the applied electric
field. Consequently, the read light beam undergoes a proportional phase shift as it
travels through the LC layer. The PAL-SLM is a continuous modulator (1.е., it is not
pixelated). It has high spatial resolution, corresponding to 480 x 480 points over its
active area of 2 x 2 cm?, and its rise (fall) time is 30 (40) ms.

a-Si:H Liquid

Transpar crystal Figure 21.3-12 Schematic of the Hama-

ransparent Transparent

electrode electrode matsu Parallel-Aligned Spatial Light Modula-

tor (PAL-SLM). This optically addressed SLM
wont has two principal layers: an amorphous silicon
— layer, which senses the write light intensity,
> <_ and a liquid-crystal (LC) layer that serves as
wane readout taht a reflective phase о the read light.
These layers are separated by a light-blocking
dielectric material. The device is encased in

glass substrates (not shown).

blocking Dielectric
layer mirror
*21.4 PHOTOREFRACTIVITY
Photorefractive materials exhibit photoconductive and electro-optic behavior, and have
the ability to detect and store spatial distributions of optical intensity in the form of
spatial patterns of altered refractive index. Photoinduced charges create a space-charge
distribution that produces an internal electric field, which in turn alters the refractive
index by means of the electro-optic effect.

Ordinary photoconductive materials are often good insulators in the dark. Upon
illumination, photons are absorbed, free charge carriers (electron—hole pairs) are gen-
erated, and the conductivity of the material increases. When the light is removed, the
process of charge photogeneration ceases, and the conductivity returns to its dark value

1006 — СНАРТЕВ21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
as the excess electrons and holes recombine. Photoconductors are most often used as
photodetectors (Sec. 19.2).

When a photorefractive material is exposed to light, free charge carriers (electrons
or holes) are generated by excitation from impurity energy levels to an energy band
at a rate proportional to the optical intensity. This process is much like that in an
extrinsic semiconductor photoconductor (Sec. 19.2B). These carriers then diffuse away
from the positions of high intensity where they were generated, leaving behind fixed
charges of the opposite sign (associated with the impurity ions). The free carriers can
be trapped by ionized impurities at other locations, depositing their charge there as they
recombine. The result is the creation of an inhomogeneous space-charge distribution
that remains in place for a period of time after the light is removed. This charge
distribution creates an internal electric-field pattern that modulates the local refractive
index of the material by virtue of the (Pockels) electro-optic effect. The image may then
be accessed optically by monitoring the spatial pattern of the refractive index using a
probe optical wave. The material can be brought back to its original state (erased) by
illumination with uniform light, or by heating. Thus, a photorefractive material can be
used to record and store images, much as with a photographic emulsion. The process
is illustrated in Fig. 21.4-1 for iron-doped lithium niobate (Fe?+/?+ :LiNbOs).

(2) Diffusion
Conduction band
(1) Photoionization | (3) Recombination
Fe2+ Fe3+
formation

+4++++ -----

Но -----

+++++ (5) Electric field -----

generation и

Figure 21.4-1  Energy-level diagram of LiNbO3 doped with Fe ions that illustrates the processes
of (1) photoionization, (2) diffusion, (3) recombination, (4) space-charge formation, and (5) electric-
field generation. The Fe’ impurity centers act as donors and become Fe®* after photoionization,
whereas the Fe** centers act as traps and revert to Fe?* after recombination.
Important photorefractive materials include lithium niobate (LiNbO3), potassium nio-
bate (KNbOs), barium titanate (BaTiO3), bismuth silicon oxide (Bij2SiO29 or BSO),
strontium barium niobate (Sr,;,Ba,_,Nb20¢ or SBN), and gallium arsenide (GaAs).
Simplified Theory of Photorefractivity
When a photorefractive material is illuminated by light of intensity J(a) that varies in
the x direction, the refractive index changes by Ап(х). The following is a step-by-step
description of the processes that mediate this effect, as illustrated in Fig. 21.4-1, to-
gether with a simplified set of one-dimensional equations that govern these processes:

1. Photoionization. The absorption of a photon at position x raises an electron from

the donor level to the conduction band. The rate of photoionization G() is
proportional both to the optical intensity and to the number density of nonionized
donors. Thus,

G(x) = $ (№ — №) [(+т), (21.4-1)
where Np is the overall number density of donors, М» is the number density
of ionized donors, and s is a constant proportional to the photoionization cross
section.

21.4 PHOTOREFRACTIVITY 1007

2. Diffusion. Since I(x) is nonuniform, the number density of excited electrons
n(x) is also nonuniform. As a result, electrons diffuse from locations of high
concentration to locations of low concentration.

3. Recombination. The electrons recombine at a rate R(x) proportional to their
number density n(x), and to the number density of ionized donors (traps) М»,
so that

R(x) = yn n(x) №, (21.4-2)
where 7, is a constant. In equilibrium, the rate of recombination equals the rate
of photoionization, 1.е., R(x) = G(x), so that

s I(x) (№ — №) = yn n(x) М, (21.4-3)
from which
Np — Ni
n(a) = ——2 ——P 12). (21.4-4)
Yr №

4. Space-charge formation. Each photogenerated electron leaves behind a positive
ionic charge. When the electron is trapped (recombines), its negative charge is
deposited at a different site. As a result, a nonuniform space-charge distribution
is formed.

5. Electric-field generation. This nonuniform space charge generates a position-
dependent electric field E(x), which may be determined by observing that in
steady state the drift and diffusion electric-current densities must be of equal
magnitude and opposite sign, so that the total current density vanishes, 1.е.,

dn
J = ейе n(x) E(x) — kT pe = 0, (21.4-5)
where де is the electron mobility, К is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is the tem-
perature. Thus,
kT 1 adn
E(x) = — —~ —. 21.4-6
(2) e n(x) dx ( )

6. Refractive-index modification. Since the material is electro-optic, the internal

electric field E(x) locally modifies its refractive index in accordance with

An(x) = —4n°r E(2), (21.4-7)
where n and r are the appropriate values of refractive index and Pockels electro-
optic coefficient for the material [see (21.1-4)].

7. Photorefractive image storage. The relation between the incident light intensity
I(x) and the resultant refractive index change An(x) may be readily estimated if
we assume that the quantity (Np / Ns — 1) in (21.4-4) is approximately constant,
independent of x. In that case n(x) is proportional to Г(1), whereupon (21.4-6)
yields

kT 1 dl
E(x) = — —~ —. 21.4-8
(2) e I(x) dx ( )

1008 — СНАРТЕВ21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
Finally, substituting (21.4-8) into (21.4-7) provides ап expression for the position-
dependent refractive-index change as a function of intensity,
kT 1 dl
An(x) = —4n°r — Fy dn (21.4-9)
e I(x) ах Refractive-Index Change
This result is readily generalized to two dimensions, whereupon it governs the
operation of a photorefractive material as an image storage device.

Many assumptions have been made in an attempt to keep the foregoing theory sim-
ple: In deriving (21.4-8) from (21.4-6) it was assumed that the ratio of number densities
of unionized to ionized donors is approximately uniform, despite the spatial variation
of the photoionization process. This assumption is approximately applicable when the
ionization is caused by other more effective processes that are position independent in
addition to the light pattern I(a). Dark conductivity and volume photovoltaic effects
were neglected. Holes were ignored. It was assumed that no external electric field was
applied, when in fact this can be useful in certain applications. The theory is valid only
in the steady state even though the time dynamics of the photorefractive process are
clearly important since they determine the speed with which the photorefractive mate-
rial responds to the applied light. Yet, in spite of all these assumptions, the simplified
theory captures the essence of the behavior of photorefractive materials.
«И
EXAMPLE 21.4-1. Photorefractive Sinusoidal Spatial Intensity Pattern. Consider an
intensity distribution that takes the form of a sinusoidal function of period A, contrast m, and mean
intensity Io, Onn

I(x) = Ip (1+ mos =), (21.4-10)
as illustrated in Fig. 21.4-2. Substituting this expression into (21.4-8) and (21.4-9) yields the internal
electric-field and refractive-index patterns

— зт(лх/Л in(27a/A
E(0) = Emax) and An(2) = Аль PCH) 014)
1+ mcos(27a/A) 1+ mcos(272/A)
where Emax = 27(kT/eA)m and Anmax = snr Emax are the maximum values of E(a) and
An(zx), respectively.
Nonuniform порт
light 1x)
_ -- -- -- тее-
+
Diffusion НН | + ++
| и UR density Nay, 7 YT x
— + > — i — E(x) x
+
Refractive- Index
index change
Figure 21.4-2 Response of a photorefractive material to a sinusoidal spatial light pattern.
As a numerical example, if A = 1 um, т = 1, and Т = 300° К, we have Emax = 1.6 x
10° V/m, an internal field is equivalent to applying 1.6 kV across a crystal of 1-ст width. The

21.4 PHOTOREFRACTIVITY 1009
maximum refractive-index change Апшах is directly proportional to the contrast m and the electro-
optic coefficient г, and inversely proportional to the spatial period A. The grating pattern An(z) is
insensitive to the average intensity J). When the image contrast m is small, the second terms in the
denominators of (21.4-11) may be neglected, in which case the internal electric field and refractive-
index change are simple sinusoidal patterns shifted by 90° relative to the incident light pattern, i.e.,

An(x) = Anmax sin (27”/A), (21.4-12)
as illustrated in Fig. 21.4-2.
«И
Applications of the Photorefractive Effect
An image I (a, у) may be stored in a photorefractive crystal in the form of a refractive-
index distribution An(a, у). The image can be read by using the crystal as a spatial
phase modulator to encode the information on a uniform optical plane wave that acts
as a probe. Phase modulation may be converted to intensity modulation, for example,
by placing the cell in an interferometer (Fig. 21.1-4).

Because of the capability of recording images, photorefractive materials are attrac-
tive for use in real-time holography (holography is discussed in Sec. 4.5). As illustrated
in Fig. 21.4-3 for two plane waves, an object wave is holographically recorded by
mixing it with a reference wave. The intensity of the sum of two such waves forms a
sinusoidal interference pattern, which is recorded in the photorefractive crystal in the
form of refractive-index variations. The crystal then serves as a volume phase hologram
(Fig. 4.5-10). To reconstruct the stored object wave, the crystal is illuminated with the
reference wave. Acting as a volume diffraction grating, the crystal reflects the reference
wave and reproduces the object wave.

Wave 1 — Pa . .. :
(reference) о. Figure 21.4-3 Two-wave mixing is а form of
a Zz ыы dynamic holography.
Se == Grating
|

Since the recording process is relatively fast, the processes of recording and re-
construction can be carried out simultaneously. The object and reference waves travel
together in the medium and exchange energy via reflection from the created grating, a
process called two-wave mixing. As shown in Fig. 21.4-3 (see also Fig. 4.5-8), waves
1 and 2 interfere and form a volume grating. Wave 1 reflects from the grating and
adds to wave 2; wave 2 reflects from the grating and adds to wave 1. Thus, the two
waves are coupled together by the grating they create in the medium. Consequently,
the transmission of wave 1 through the medium is controlled by the presence of wave
2, and vice versa. For example, wave | may be amplified at the expense of wave 2.

The mixing of multiple waves also occurs in other nonlinear optical materials with
light-dependent optical properties, as discussed in Chapter 22. Wave mixing has nu-
merous applications in optical data processing (Chapters 22 and 24), including image
amplification, the removal of image aberrations, the cross-correlation of images, and
optical interconnections.

Electrochromism

Another electro-optic effect involving the transport of charge is electrochromism,
wherein an electric field causes a change in the absorption spectrum (color) of a mate-
rial. Applications include displays and electrically controlled windows. Both inorganic
and organic materials can exhibit electrochromism.

1010 — СНАРТЕВ21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
21.5 ELECTROABSORPTION

Electroabsorption is a change of the absorption characteristics of a medium in re-
sponse to an externally applied electric field. In a bulk semiconductor, the application
of an external electric field results in electron tunneling, which extends the absorption
edge into the forbidden gap. The bandgap energy of the material E, is thus reduced be-
low that provided by the band tail and the Urbach tail, so that hvz < hi, when the field
is ON, as illustrated in Fig. 21.5-1(а). This phenomenon, known as the Franz—Keldysh
effect, therefore shifts the absorption spectrum to longer wavelengths [Fig. 21.5-1(b)].
The applied electric field also results in the broadening, and ultimate disappearance of,
the exciton absorption peaks (Sec. 17.2C).

This effect may be used in optical electroabsorption modulators and electroab-
sorption switches, which are technologically simple to implement. In the absence of
the electric field (OFF), an incident beam at the operating wavelength, which is longer
than the normal bandgap wavelength, is transmitted without absorption [Fig. 21.5-
1(6)]. However, upon application of the electric field (ON), the light is absorbed. Such
modulators are often constructed in the form of waveguides, with the electric field
applied in a direction perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the light beam,
as portrayed in Fig. 21.5-1(c). In comparison with electro-optic modulators, which op-
erate on the basis of refractive-index change in response to an externally applied elec-
tric field (Secs. 21.1-21.3), electroabsorption modulators typically operate at greater
speeds and at lower voltages. Moreover, they can be integrated on the same chip as
semiconductor light sources so they are convenient for use in optical fiber commu-
nication systems. They also exhibit less chirp than directly modulated laser diodes
(Sec. 25.1B).

—— Wavelength
OFF ON ол
Е | Incident
hv И Е ON H beam
| >» 8 i я Semiconductor
vd
+!
Photon energy ——
(a) (b) ©
Figure 21.5-1 The Franz—Keldysh effect. (a) The bandgap energy E, in the absence of an external
electric field (OFF) is reduced in its presence (ON). (b) Change in the absorption spectrum caused
by the presence of an electric field, which moves the absorption peak toward longer wavelengths.
(c) Electroabsorption modulator in a waveguide configuration.

The electroabsorption effect is more pronounced in semiconductor multiquantum-
well (MQW) structures (Secs. 17.1G and 18.2D). An electric field applied in the plane
of a quantum well gives rise to behavior similar to the Franz—Keldysh effect, including
a shift of the absorption edge to a longer wavelength and exciton dissociation. How-
ever, an electric field applied in the direction of confinement gives rise to additional
phenomena, known collectively as the quantum-confined Stark effect (QCSE), as
illustrated in Fig. 21.5-2:

и The energy difference between the conduction- and valence-band energy levels

decreases with increasing electric field (hig < hi).

= The band tilt causes the locations of the wavefunctions to shift toward the edges

of the well.

21.5 ELECTROABSORPTION 1011
= Exciton ionization is inhibited and exciton energy levels remain unbroadened
even at high field levels, since the electron and hole remain in proximity by virtue
of the confinement.
Wavelength (nm)
OFF ON 860 850
м Incident
2 “am Modulated
ПАГ lap 2 Na | | beam
t Е
hy, hy § Mow
Гы |
— 8
1.43 1.44 1.45 1.46 1.47
(a) (b) Photon energy (eV) ©
Figure 21.5-2 (a) Energy-band diagrams of a quantum well in the absence (OFF) and presence
(ON) of an external electric field applied in the direction of confinement. The field causes the
interband energy difference to decrease and the wavefunctions to shift from the centers of the wells
toward opposite edges. (b) Absorption spectrum in an AlGaAs/GaAs multiquantum-well structure
for various values of the applied voltage (field). The exciton absorption peak moves toward longer
wavelengths as the voltage is increased. (Adapted from О. A. В. Miller, D. S. Света, Т. С. Damen,
Т.Н. Wood, С. A. Burrus, Jr., A. С. Gossard, and W. Wiegmann, The Quantum Well Self-Electrooptic
Effect Device: Optoelectronic Bistability and Oscillation, and Self-Linearized Modulation, JEEE
Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. 21, pp. 1462-1476, Fig. 1 ©1985 IEEE.) (с) Schematic of
a MQW electroabsorption modulator operated in a surface-normal architecture.

As a result of these MQW characteristics, the wavelength shift of the absorption
peak is greater, and the absorption edge is more abrupt, than in bulk semiconductors.
Electroabsorption modulators based on the QCSE have excellent characteristics, in-
cluding

= High speeds

= Large extinction ratios

= Low drive voltages

= Low chirp
The simplest transmission implementation directs light through an intrinsic MQW
structure sandwiched between p and n regions across which a voltage is applied.
Switching is accomplished by simply turning the voltage on and off. A device of this
sort can also be fabricated in a waveguide configuration and can be integrated with
a distributed-feedback (DFB) laser on a single chip. QCSE modulators and switches
can also be fabricated in the form of arrays operated in a double-pass surface-normal
architecture, as illustrated in Fig. 21.5-2(c).
ПИ
EXAMPLE 21.5-1. GeSi Electroabsorption Modulator. Optical modulators are important
elements in integrated photonics. Though silicon has a small electro-optic coefficient, SiGe is suitable
for the fabrication of electroabsorption modulators (EAMs). A GeSi EAM with an active region of
1 wm x 50 yum, integrated on a 3-jum-high silicon-on-insulator waveguide, operates over а 35-nm
wavelength range in the vicinity of 1550 nm. The device has a 3-dB bandwidth of 35 GHz and a
swing voltage of 2.5 V.
ПОНИ

1012 CHAPTER 21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
READING LIST

Electro-Optics

See also the reading list on crystals and tensor analysis in Chapter 6 and the reading list in Chapter 22.

T.-C. Poon and T. Kim, Engineering Optics with MATLAB, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2018, Chapter 5.

L. R. Dalton, P. Giinter, M. Jazbinsek, O.-P. Kwon, and P. A. Sullivan, Organic Electro-Optics and
Photonics: Molecules, Polymers, and Crystals, Cambridge University Press, 2015.

R. Dinu, E. Miller, G. Yu, B. Chen, A. Scarpaci, H. Chen, and C. Pilgrim, High-Speed Polymer Opti-
cal Modulators, in Т.Р. Kaminow, T. Li, and A. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications
VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

С.Р. Boreman, Basic Electro-Optics for Electrical Engineers, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 1998.

Е. Agullé-Lopez, J. М. Cabrera, and Е. Agull6-Rueda, Electrooptics: Phenomena, Materials and
Applications, Academic Press, 1994.

I. P. Kaminow, An Introduction to Electrooptic Devices, Academic Press, 1974.

Liquid-Crystal Devices and Displays

See also the reading list on liquid crystals in Chapter 6.

У. С. Coffey, The Age of OLED Displays, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 34-41,
2017.

D.-K. Yang and S.-T. Wu, Fundamentals of Liquid Crystal Devices, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2015.

S. R. Restaino and S. W. Teare, Introduction to Liquid Crystals for Optical Design and Engineering,
SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2015.

R. H. Chen, Liguid Crystal Displays: Fundamental Physics and Technology, Wiley, 2011.

P. Yeh and C. Gu, Optics of Liquid Crystal Displays, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2010.

W. den Boer, Active Matrix Liquid Crystal Displays: Fundamentals and Applications, Elsevier, 2010.

L. Vicari, Optical Applications of Liquid Crystals, Institute of Physics, 2003.

V. G. Chigrinov, Liquid Crystal Devices: Physics and Applications, Artech, 1999.

U. Efron, ed., Spatial Light Modulator Technology: Materials, Devices, and Applications, CRC Press,
1995.

P. G. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals, Oxford University Press, 2nd ed. 1993.

M. A. Karim, ed., Electro-Optical Displays, CRC Press, 1992.

Photorefractive Materials

J. Frejlich, Photorefractive Materials: Fundamental Concepts, Holographic Recording and Materials
Characterization, Wiley, 2007.

P. Giinter and J.-P. Huignard, eds., Photorefractive Materials and Their Applications. 3: Applications,
Springer-Verlag, 2007.

P. Giinter and J.-P. Huignard, eds., Photorefractive Materials and Their Applications. 2: Materials,
Springer-Verlag, 2007, paperback ed. 2011.

P. Ginter and J.-P. Huignard, eds., Photorefractive Materials and Their Applications. 1: Basic Effects,
Springer-Verlag, 2006, paperback ed. 2010.

Е Т. $. Yu and $. Yin, eds., Photorefractive Optics: Materials, Properties, and Applications, Aca-
demic Press, 2000.

L. Solymar, D. J. Webb, and A. Grunnet-Jepsen, The Physics and Applications of Photorefractive
Materials, Oxford University Press, 1996.

P. Yeh and C. Gu, eds., Landmark Papers on Photorefractive Nonlinear Optics, World Scientific,
1995.

F. M. Davidson, ed., Selected Papers on Photorefractive Materials, SPIE Optical Engineering Press
(Milestone Series Volume 86), 1994.

P. Yeh, Introduction to Photorefractive Nonlinear Optics, Wiley, 1993.

D. M. Pepper, J. Feinberg, and N. K. Kukhtarev, The Photorefractive Effect, Scientific American,
vol. 263, по. 4, рр. 62-74, 1990.

PROBLEMS 1013

Electroabsorption

р. Feng, W. Qian, H. Liang, C.-C. Kung, Z. Zhou, Z. Li, J. $. Levy, В. Shafiiha, J. Fong, В. J. Luff,
and M. Asghari, High-Speed GeSi Electroabsorption Modulator on the SOI Waveguide Platform,
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 19, 3401710, 2013.

Y.-H. Kuo, Y. K. Lee, Y. Ge, S. Ren, J. E. Roth, T. I. Kamins, D. A. B. Miller, and J. S. Harris,
Strong Quantum-Confined Stark Effect in Germanium Quantum-Well Structures on Silicon, Na-
ture, vol. 437, рр. 1334-1336, 2005.

PROBLEMS

21.1-2 Response Time of a Phase Modulator. A GaAs crystal with refractive index п = 3.6
and electro-optic coefficient r = 1.6 pm/V is used as an electro-optic phase modulator
operating at Л. = 1.3 um in the longitudinal configuration. The crystal is 3 cm long and
has а 1-cm? cross-sectional area. Determine the half-wave voltage V,, the transit time of
light through the crystal, and the electrical capacitance of the device (the low-frequency
relative permittivity of GaAs is €/e, = 13.5). The voltage is applied with a source of 50-Q
resistance. Which factor limits the speed of the device, the transit time of the light through
the crystal or the response time of the electrical circuit?

21.1-3 Sensitivity of an Interferometric Electro-Optic Intensity Modulator. An integrated-

photonic intensity modulator in a Mach—Zehnder configuration, such as that illustrated in
Fig. 21.1-5, is used as a linear analog modulator. If the half-wave voltage is V, = 10 V,
what is the sensitivity of the device (the incremental change of the intensity transmittance
per unit incremental change of the applied voltage)?

21.1-4 Ап Elasto-Optic Strain Sensor. An elasto-optic material exhibits a change of the refractive

index proportional to the strain. Design a strain sensor based on this effect in the context
of an integrated-photonic implementation. If the material is also electro-optic, consider a
design based on compensating the elasto-optic and electro-optic refractive index changes
against each other, and determining the electric field that nulls the reading of the photode-
tector in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer configuration.

21.1-5 Magneto-Optic Modulator. Describe how a Faraday rotator (see Sec. 6.4B) may be used

as an optical intensity modulator.

*21.2-2 Silica Integrated-Photonic Phase Modulator. Since bulk fused silica is centrosymmetric,
it does not ordinarily exhibit the linear electro-optic (Pockels) effect. However, thermally
poled silica has Pockels coefficients that are sufficiently large for use as optical modulators.
Determine the phase shift introduced by a poled-silica integrated-photonic phase modulator
in a configuration such as that shown in Fig. 21.1-3. Assume that the electrode length is
Г = 25 mm, the electrode separation is d = 30 ут, and the wavelength is А = 1.55 wm.
Assume also that the optical wave is polarized in the y direction, the electric field is created
by an applied voltage V = 400 V and points in the y direction, and the wave travels along
the electrodes in the z direction. The material is poled in a direction such that its principal
axes (21, 22, хз) point in the z, x, and у directions, respectively. The refractive index of the
poled material is n = 1.445 and the Pockels coefficients are characterized by the matrix

0 0 T13
0 0 T13
о ыы "93| with rss = 0.15 pm/V.
0 0 0

1014 CHAPTER 21 ELECTRO-OPTICS
*21.2-3 Cascaded Phase Modulators.

(a) A КОР crystal (141 = 8 pm/V, re3 = 11 pm/V; no = 1.507, п. = 1.467 at A, =
633 nm) is used as a longitudinal phase modulator. The orientation of the crystal axes
and the applied electric field are as shown in Examples 21.2-2 and 21.2-6. Determine
the half-wave voltage V, at Л, = 633 nm.

(b) An electro-optic phase modulator consists of 9 KDP crystals separated by electrodes
that are biased as shown in Fig. P21.2-3. How should the plates be oriented relative
to each other so that the total phase modulation is maximized? Calculate V, for the
composite modulator.

у Ones
Incident
light Modulated
В light
0 Figure P21.2-3
*21.2-4 The “Push-Pull” Intensity Modulator. An optical intensity modulator uses two integrated
electro-optic phase modulators and a 3-dB directional coupler, as shown in Fig. P21.2-4. The
input wave is split into two waves of equal amplitudes, each of which is phase modulated,
reflected from a mirror, phase modulated once again, and the two returning waves are added
by the directional coupler to form the output wave. Derive an expression for the intensity
transmittance of the device in terms of the applied voltage, wavelength, dimensions, and
physical parameters of the phase modulator.
Output
Input
—. у
272
у Mirrors
Figure P21.2-4
*21.2-5 А LiNbO; Integrated-Photonic Intensity Modulator. Design a LiNbO: integrated-

photonic intensity modulator using the Mach-Zehnder interferometer shown in Fig. 21.1-5.

Select the orientation of the crystal and the polarization of the guided wave to achieve the

smallest half-wave voltage V,. Assume that the active region has length L = 1 mm and

width 4 = 5 ит. The wavelength is A, = 0.85 jum, the refractive indices aren, = 2.29

and п. = 2.17, and the electro-optic coefficients are гзз = 30.9, r13 = 8.6, reo = 3.4, and

*21.2-6 Double Refraction in an Electro-Optic Crystal.

(а) An unpolarized He-Ne laser beam (A, = 633 nm) is transmitted through a 1-cm-thick
LiNbOs3 plate (п. = 2.17, no = 2.29, r33 = 30.9 pm/V, ri3 = 8.6 pm/V). The beam
is orthogonal to the plate and the optic axis lies in the plane of incidence of the light at
45° with the beam. The beam is double refracted (see Sec. 6.3E). Determine the lateral
displacement and the retardation between the ordinary and extraordinary beams.

(b) If an electric field Е = 30 V/m is applied in a direction parallel to the optic axis, what
is the effect on the transmitted beams? What are possible applications of this device?

CHAPTER
a
22.1 NONLINEAR OPTICAL MEDIA 1017
22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1021

А. Second-Harmonic Generation (SHG) and Rectification
B. The Electro-Optic Effect
С. Three-Wave Mixing
D. Phase Matching and Tuning Curves
Е. Quasi-Phase Matching
22.3 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1036

A. Third-Harmonic Generation (THG) and Optical Kerr Effect
В. Self-Phase Modulation (SPM), Self-Focusing, and Spatial Solitons
С. Cross-Phase Modulation (XPM)
D. Four-Wave Mixing (FWM)
E. Optical Phase Conjugation (OPC)

*22.4 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1047
A. Second-Harmonic Generation (SHG)
B. Optical Frequency Conversion (OFC)
C. Optical Parametric Amplification (OPA) and Oscillation (OPO)

*22.5 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1059
A. Four-Wave Mixing (FWM)
В. Three-Wave Mixing and Third-Harmonic Generation (THG)
C. Optical Phase Conjugation (OPC)

*22.6 ANISOTROPIC NONLINEAR MEDIA 1066
*22.7 DISPERSIVE NONLINEAR MEDIA 1069
Nicolaas Bloembergen (1920-2017) began Peter A. Franken (1928-1999) provided
his seminal studies in nonlinear optics in the the first demonstration of optical second-
early 1960s. He shared the 1981 Nobel Prize harmonic generation by converting red laser
with Arthur Schawlow (pictured on p. 657). light into ultraviolet light in a quartz crystal.

Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1015

CSC
Throughout the long history of optics, and indeed until relatively recently, it was
thought that all optical media were linear. The consequences of this assumption are
far-reaching:

= The optical properties of materials, such as refractive index and absorption coef-

ficient, are independent of light intensity.

= The principle of superposition, a fundamental tenet of classical optics, is applica-

ble.

= The frequency of light is never altered by its passage through a medium.

= Two beams of light in the same region of a medium have no effect on each other

so that light cannot be used to control light.
The operation of the first laser in 1960 enabled us to examine the behavior of light in
optical materials at higher intensities than previously possible. Experiments carried out
in the post-laser era clearly demonstrate that optical media do in fact exhibit nonlinear
behavior, as exemplified by the following observations:

= The refractive index, and consequently the speed of light in a nonlinear optical

medium, does depend on light intensity.

= The principle of superposition is violated in a nonlinear optical medium.

= The frequency of light is altered as it passes through a nonlinear optical medium;

the light can change from red to blue, for example.

= Photons do interact within the confines of a nonlinear optical medium so that light

can indeed be used to control light.
The field of nonlinear optics offers a host of fascinating phenomena, many of which
are also eminently useful.

Nonlinear optical behavior is not observed when light travels in free space. The
“nonlinearity” resides in the medium through which the light travels, rather than in the
light itself. The interaction of light with light is therefore mediated by the nonlinear
medium: the presence of an optical field modifies the properties of the medium, which
in turn causes another optical field, or even the original field itself, to be modified.

As discussed in Chapter 5, the properties of a dielectric medium through which
an optical electromagnetic wave propagates are described by the relation between the
polarization-density vector P(r, t) and the electric-field vector E(r, $). Indeed it is use-
ful to view P(r, t) as the output of a system whose input is & (г, +). The mathematical
relation between the vector functions P(r,t) and E(r,t), which is governed by the
characteristics of the medium, defines the system. The medium is said to be nonlinear
if this relation is nonlinear (see Sec. 5.2).

This Chapter

In Chapter 5, dielectric media were further classified with respect to their dispersive-
ness, inhomogeneity, and anisotropy (see Sec. 5.2). To focus on the principal effect of
interest — nonlinearity — the first portion of our exposition is restricted to a medium
that is nondispersive, homogeneous, and isotropic. The vectors P and & are соп-
sequently parallel at every position and time and may therefore be examined on a
component-by-component basis.

The theory of nonlinear optics and its applications is presented at two levels. A
simplified approach is provided in Secs. 22.1-22.3. This is followed by a more detailed
analysis of the same phenomena in Sec. 22.4 and Sec. 22.5.

The propagation of light in media characterized by a second-order (quadratic) non-
linear relation between P and © is described in Sec. 22.2 and Sec. 22.4. Applications
include the frequency doubling of a monochromatic wave (second-harmonic genera-
tion), the mixing of two monochromatic waves to generate a third wave at their sum or
difference frequencies (frequency conversion), the use of two monochromatic waves
1016

22.1 NONLINEAR OPTICAL MEDIA 1017
to amplify a third wave (parametric amplification), and the incorporation of feedback
in a parametric-amplification device to create an oscillator (parametric oscillation).
Wave propagation in a medium with a third-order (cubic) relation between P and € is
discussed in Secs. 22.3 and 22.5. Applications include third-harmonic generation, self-
phase modulation, self-focusing, four-wave mixing, and optical phase conjugation. The
behavior of anisotropic and dispersive nonlinear optical media is briefly considered in
Secs. 22.6 and 22.7, respectively.

Nonlinear Optics in Other Chapters

A principal assumption of the treatment provided in this chapter is that the nonlinear
optical medium is passive, i.e., it does not exchange energy with the light wave(s).
Waves of different frequencies may exchange energy with each another via the non-
linear property of the medium, but their total energy is conserved. This class of non-
linear phenomena, known as parametric interactions, are so-named because a param-
eter of the system is varied periodically in time; a strong electric field, for example,
can cause the electric susceptibility to oscillate in time. Several nonlinear phenomena
involving nonparametric interactions are described in other chapters of this book:

и Laser interactions. The interactions of light with a medium at frequencies near
atomic or molecular resonances involve phenomena such as absorption, and stim-
ulated and spontaneous emission, as described in Sec. 14.3. These interactions
become nonlinear when the light is sufficiently intense so that the populations
of the various energy levels are significantly altered. Nonlinear optical effects are
manifested in the saturation of laser amplifiers and saturable absorbers (Sec. 15.4).

= Multiphoton absorption. Intense light can induce the absorption of multiple pho-
tons whose total energy matches that of an atomic transition. For k-photon absorp-
tion, the rate of absorption is proportional to J*, where J is the optical intensity.
This nonlinear optical phenomenon is described briefly in Sec. 14.5B.

= Nonlinear scattering. Nonlinear inelastic scattering involves the interaction of
light with the vibrational or acoustic modes of a medium. Examples include
stimulated Raman and stimulated Brillouin scattering, as described in Secs. 14.5C
and 15.3D.

It is also assumed throughout this chapter that the light is described by stationary
continuous waves. Nonstationary nonlinear optical phenomena include:

= Nonlinear optics of pulsed light. The parametric interaction of optical pulses with
a nonlinear medium is described in Sec. 23.5.

= Optical solitons are light pulses that travel over exceptionally long distances
through nonlinear dispersive media without changing their width or shape. This
nonlinear phenomenon is the result of a balance between dispersion and nonlinear
self-phase modulation, as described in Sec. 23.5B. The use of solitons in optical
fiber communication systems is described in Sec. 25.2E.

Yet another nonlinear optical effect is optical bistability. This involves nonlinear opti-
cal effects together with feedback. The use of optical bistability in photonic logic gates
is described in Sec. 24.4.
22.1 NONLINEAR OPTICAL MEDIA

A linear dielectric medium is characterized by a linear relation between the polarization
density and the electric field, P = e,x€, where ео is the permittivity of free space and
x is the electric susceptibility of the medium (see Sec. 5.2A). A nonlinear dielectric
medium, on the other hand, is characterized by a nonlinear relation between P and €
(see Sec. 5.2B), as illustrated in Fig. 22.1-1.

The nonlinearity may be of microscopic or macroscopic origin. The polarization

1018 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
P P
i Figure 22.1-1 The P-€ relation
for (a) a linear dielectric medium,
é AZ 5 and (5) а nonlinear medium.
(a) Linear (b) Nonlinear
density ? = Np is a product of the individual dipole moment p induced by the applied
electric field € and the number density of dipole moments N. The nonlinear behavior
may reside either in р or in М.

The relation between р and © is linear when & is small, but becomes nonlinear when
€ acquires values comparable to interatomic electric fields, which are typically ~ 10°—
10° V/m. This may be understood in terms of a simple Lorentz oscillator model in
which the dipole moment 15 р = —ez, where x is the displacement of a mass of
charge —e to which an electric force —e€ is applied (see Sec. 5.5C). If the restraining
elastic force is proportional to the displacement (1.е., if Hooke’s law is satisfied), the
equilibrium displacement x is proportional to €. In that case P is proportional to €
and the medium is linear. However, if the restraining force is a nonlinear function
of the displacement, the equilibrium displacement x and the polarization density P
are nonlinear functions of € and, consequently, the medium is nonlinear. The time
dynamics of an anharmonic oscillator model describing a dielectric medium with these
features is discussed in Sec. 22.7.

Another possible origin of a nonlinear response of an optical material to light is the
dependence of the number density N on the optical field. An example is provided by
a laser medium in which the number of atoms occupying the energy levels involved in
the absorption and emission of light are dependent on the intensity of the light itself
(see Sec. 15.4).

Since externally applied optical electric fields are typically small in comparison with
characteristic interatomic or crystalline fields, even when focused laser light is used,
the nonlinearity is usually weak. The relation between ? and © is then approximately
linear for small €, deviating only slightly from linearity as € increases (see Fig. 22.1-
1). Under these circumstances, the function that relates P to € can be expanded in a
Taylor series about € = 0,

P= aE + Zag€? + daze? +..., (22.1-1)
and it suffices to use only a few terms. The coefficients а1, a2, and аз are, respectively,
the first, second, and third derivatives of P with respect to €, evaluated at € = 0.
These coefficients are characteristic constants of the medium. The first term, which is
linear, dominates at small €. Clearly, a; = вох, where x is the linear susceptibility,
which is related to the relative permittivity and the refractive index of the material via
п? =e /€o = 1+ Х [see (5.2-13)]. The second term represents a quadratic or second-
order nonlinearity, while the third term represents a third-order nonlinearity, and so
on.

It is customary to write (22.1-1) in the form’

* Ап alternative form of this relation, P = €o(x& + Х(2) Е? + y? €3), is also widely used.

22.1 NONLINEAR OPTICAL MEDIA 1019
where d = Fag and х® = 443 are nonlinear optical coefficients that serve to
describe the strength of the second- and third-order nonlinear effects, respectively.

Equation (22.1-2) provides the essential mathematical characterization of a non-
linear optical medium. Material dispersion, inhomogeneity, and anisotropy have not
been accommodated, both for the sake of simplicity and to enable us to focus on the
essential features of nonlinear optical behavior. Sections 22.6 and 22.7 are devoted to
anisotropic and dispersive nonlinear media, respectively.

In centrosymmetric media, which have inversion symmetry so that the properties
of the medium are not altered by the transformation г + —r, the P—E€ function must
have odd symmetry, so that the reversal of € results in the reversal of P without any
other change. The second-order nonlinear optical coefficient d must then vanish, and
the lowest order nonlinearity is of third order.

Typical values of the second-order nonlinear optical coefficient d for dielectric
crystals, semiconductors, and organic materials used in photonics applications lie in
the range а = 10-74-10~?! (C/V? in MKS units). Typical values of the third-order
nonlinear optical coefficient y“) for glasses, crystals, semiconductors, semiconductor-
doped glasses, and organic materials of interest in photonics are in the vicinity of
x) = 10-34—10-29 (Cm/V? in MKS units). Biased or asymmetric quantum wells
offer large nonlinearities in the mid and far infrared.
НИ
EXERCISE 22.1-1
Intensity of Light Required to Elicit Nonlinear Effects.

(a) Determine the light intensity (in W/cm?) at which the ratio of the second term to the first term in
(22.1-2) is 1% in an ADP (NH,H2PO,) crystal for which n = 1.5 and а = 6.8 x 10-24 C/V?
at Ло = 1.06 ит.

(b) Determine the light intensity at which the third term in (22.1-2) is 1% of the first term in carbon
disulfide (CS2) for which n = 1.6, 4 = 0, and y°) = 4.4 x 10-32 Cm/V? at A, = 694 nm.
Note: In accordance with (5.4-8), the light intensity is Г = |Fo|?/2n = (€7)/n, where 7 = y,/n
is the impedance of the medium and n, = \/ро/е› & 377 © is the impedance of free space (see

Sec. 5.4).

НИ

The Nonlinear Wave Equation

The propagation of light in a nonlinear medium is governed by the wave equation (5.2-

25), which was derived from Maxwell’s equations for an arbitrary homogeneous,

isotropic dielectric medium. The isotropy of the medium ensures that the vectors P

and & are always parallel so that they may be examined оп a component-by-component

basis, which allows us to write (5.2-25) as
1 028 oP
УЕ sa = boa 22.1-3
2 ое ^ дв (22.1-3)

It is convenient to write the polarization density in (22.1-2) аз а sum of linear (©Х&)
and nonlinear (P,) parts,

P= eoVE + Pur, (22.1-4)
Py, = 248? + 4yP EF +.... (22.1-5)

Using (22.1-4), along with the relations с = со/п, п? = 1+ x, and cy = 1/,\/€ofto

provided in (5.2-12) and (5.2-13), allows (22.1-3) to be written as

1020 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
1 OPE
VE - = =-8 22.1-6
с? ОР ( )
02?
8 = -po— =: (22.1-7)
ot Wave Equation
in Nonlinear Medium
It is convenient to regard (22. 1-6) as a wave equation in which the term S(t) is regarded
as a source that radiates in a linear medium of refractive index п. Because Ри, (and
therefore S) is a nonlinear function of €, (22.1-6) is a nonlinear partial differential
equation in €. This is the basic equation that underlies the theory of nonlinear optics.
Two approximate approaches to solving this nonlinear wave equation can be called
upon. The first is the iterative approach known as the Born approximation. This approx-
imation underlies the simplified introduction to nonlinear optics presented in Secs. 22.2
and 22.3. The second approach is a coupled-wave theory in which the nonlinear wave
equation is used to derive approximate linear coupled partial differential equations that
govern the interacting waves. This is the basis of the more advanced study of wave
interactions in nonlinear media presented in Secs. 22.4 and 22.5.
Scattering Theory of Nonlinear Optics: The Born Approximation
The radiation source $ in (22.1-6) is a function of the field € that it, itself, radiates. To
emphasize this point we write $ = 8(€) and illustrate the process by the simple block
diagram in Fig. 22.1-2. Suppose that an optical field Eo is incident on a nonlinear
medium confined to some volume, as shown in the figure. This field creates a radiation
source S(€q) that radiates an optical field €,. The corresponding radiation source 5(&1)
radiates a field &2, and so on. This process suggests an iterative solution, the first step
of which is known as the first Born approximation. The second Born approximation
carries the process an additional step, and so on. The first Born approximation is
Incident Radiated
light E light 1
—> aT
р“ s :
Radiation |
Ню
source Nonlinear @)
5(&0) medium
Figure 22.1-2 The first Born approximation. An incident optical field &о creates a source 8(E),
which radiates an optical field €,.
adequate when the light intensity is sufficiently weak so that the nonlinearity is small.
In this approximation, light propagation through the nonlinear medium is regarded as a
scattering process in which the incident field is scattered by the medium. The scattered
light is determined from the incident light in two steps:
1. The incident field со is used to determine the nonlinear polarization density Py,
from which the radiation source S(€ 9) is determined.
2. The radiated (scattered) field €; is determined from the radiation source by
adding the spherical waves associated with the different source points (as in the
theory of scattering discussed in Sec. 5.6).

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1021

The development presented in Secs. 22.2 and 22.3 are based on the first Born
approximation. The initial field Со is assumed to contain one or several monochromatic
waves of different frequencies. The corresponding nonlinear polarization density Py,
is then determined using (22.1-5) and the source function S(€9) is evaluated using
(22.1-7). Since S(Eq) is a nonlinear function, new frequencies are created and the
source emits an optical field &1 with frequencies not present in the original wave €o.
This leads to numerous interesting phenomena that have been utilized to make useful
nonlinear optics devices.

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS
In this section we examine the optical properties of a nonlinear medium in which
nonlinearities of order higher than the second are negligible, so that
Puy, = 2d€?. (22.2-1)
A material for which (22.2-1) is applicable is called a second-order nonlinear
medium; more colloquially it is also known as a chi-two medium since Py, =
242? = вх“) Е? (see footnote on page 1018).

We proceed to consider an electric field € comprising one or two harmonic compo-
nents and determine the spectral components of Py,,. In accordance with the first Born
approximation, the radiation source $ contains the same spectral components as Py,
and, therefore, so too does the emitted (scattered) field.

A. Second-Harmonic Generation (SHG) and Rectification
Consider first the response of this nonlinear medium to a single harmonic electric field
of angular frequency w (wavelength Ло = 27c,/w) and complex amplitude E(w):

E(t) = Re{ E(w) exp(jwt)} = 4[E(w) exp(jwt) + E*(w) exp(—jwt)]. (22.2-2)
The corresponding nonlinear polarization density Py, is obtained by substituting (22.2-
2) into (22.2-1),

Pri (t) = Pyi(0) + Re{ Px (2) exp(j2wt) } (22.2-3)
where
Py, (0) = d E(w) E* (w) (22.2-4)
Py. (2w) = d E?(w). (22.2-5)
This process is graphically illustrated in Fig. 22.2-1.
Second-Harmonic Generation (SHG)
The source S(t) = —j1,0?Px,,/Ot? corresponding to (22.2-3) has a component at
frequency 2w with complex amplitude S(2w) = Ао? dE(w) E(w), which radiates
an optical field at frequency 2w (wavelength \,/2). Thus, the scattered optical field has
a component at the second harmonic of the incident optical field. Since the amplitude
of the emitted second-harmonic light is proportional to 5(2%), its intensity I(2w) is
proportional to |.$(2w)|?, which in turn is proportional to the square of the intensity of
the incident wave I(w) = |E(w)|?/2n and to the square of the nonlinear coefficient 4.
Also, since the emissions are added coherently, the intensity of the second-harmonic
wave is proportional to the square of the length of the interaction region L.

1022 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
P
Pri

— 0 © 7 = + для

== DC Second-harmonic
Figure 22.2-1 A sinusoidal electric field of angular frequency w in a second-order nonlinear
optical medium creates a polarization density with a component at 2w (second-harmonic) and a steady
(DC) component.

The efficiency of second-harmonic generation Nsyq = I(2w)/I(w) is therefore
proportional to L?J(w). Since I(w) = P/A, where P is the incident power and A is the
cross-sectional area of the interaction volume, the SHG efficiency is often expressed in
the form

L?
вне = СР, (22.2-6)
SHG Efficiency
where С? is a constant (units of W~‘) proportional to а? and w?. An expression for С?
will be provided in (22.4-36).

In accordance with (22.2-6), to maximize the SHG efficiency it is essential that the
incident wave have the largest possible power P. This is accomplished by the use of
pulsed lasers for which the energy is confined in time, so that large peak powers are
obtained. Additionally, to maximize the ratio L?/A, the wave must be focused to the
smallest possible area A and experience the longest possible interaction length L. For
a thin crystal, Г, is determined by the length of the crystal so that the beam should be
focused to the smallest spot area A [Fig. 22.2-2(a)]. If the dimensions of the nonlinear
medium are not limiting factors, however, the maximum value of Г, for a given area
A is limited by beam diffraction. For example, a Gaussian beam focused to a beam
width Wo maintains a beam cross-sectional area A ~ лИ/2 over a depth of focus
L = 220 = 21/2 /Л [see (3.1-22)] so that the ratio L?/A = 2L/ = 4A/)?. In this
case, the beam should be focused to the largest spot size, corresponding to the largest
depth of focus. The efficiency is then proportional to Г. For a thick crystal, therefore,
the beam should be focused to the largest spot that fits within the cross-sectional area
of the crystal [Fig. 22.2-2(6)].

о ОИ р L —_
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 22.2-2 SHG interaction volumes. (a) For a thin crystal, minimize A. (6) For a thick crystal,
maximize A. (c) For an optical waveguide, maximize L.

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1023

Guided-wave structures offer the advantage of light confinement in a small cross-
sectional area over long lengths. Since A is determined by the size of the guided
mode, the efficiency is proportional to L? [Fig. 22.2-2(c)]. Optical waveguides take
the form of planar or channel waveguides (Chapter 9) or fibers (Chapter 10). Though
silica-glass fibers were initially ruled out for second-harmonic generation since glass is
centrosymmetric (and therefore presumably has d = 0), second-harmonic generation
is in fact observed in silica-glass fibers, an effect attributed to electric-quadrupole and
magnetic-dipole interactions and to defects and color centers in the fiber core.

Figure 22.2-3 displays several experimental configurations for generating optical
second-harmonic generation in bulk materials and in waveguides, in which visible light
is converted to ultraviolet light and infrared light is converted to visible light.

wW 2w —
/ 694 пт (red) _ -347nm (UV)
KDP crystal
Ww 2w —=
_© .-
/ 1.06 0т (IR) Ge- and P-doped 530 nm (green)
silica-glass fiber
—> w 790 nm (IR)
(с) —> 2; 395 пт (violet)
AlGaAs laser
Figure 22.2-3 Optical second-harmonic generation (a) in a bulk crystal; (6) in a doped silica-glass
fiber; (c) within the cavity of a laser diode.
Optical Rectification
The component Px,(0) in (22.2-3) and (22.2-4) corresponds to a steady (non-time-
varying) polarization density that creates a DC potential difference across the plates of
a capacitor within which the nonlinear material is placed (Fig. 22.2-4). The generation
of a DC voltage as a result of an intense optical field represents optical rectification
Gin analogy with the conversion of a sinusoidal AC voltage into a DC voltage in an
ordinary electronic rectifier). An optical pulse with a peak power of several MW, for
example, may generate a voltage of several hundred У.
Light Figure 22.2-4 The transmission of an intense
beam of light through a second-order nonlinear
crystal generates a DC voltage across it.

1024 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
B. The Electro-Optic Effect
We now consider an electric field & (+) comprising a harmonic component at an optical
frequency w together with a steady component (at w = 0),

E(t) = E(0) + Re{ E(w) exp(jwt)}. (22.2-7)
We distinguish between these two components by denoting the electric field Е(0) and
the optical field E(w). In fact, both components are electric fields.

Substituting (22.2-7) into (22.2-1), we obtain

Ри. (Е) = Pyi(0) + Re{ Ру, (w) exp(jwt)} + Re{ Py, (2%) exp(j2wt)}, (22.2-8)
where

Py, (0) = d [2E°(0) + |E(w)|?] (22.2-9a)

Py (w) = 4d E(0) E(w) (22.2-9b)

Py,,(2w) = d E?(w), (22.2-9c)

so that the polarization density contains components at the angular frequencies 0, w,
and 2w.

If the optical field is substantially smaller in magnitude than the electric field, 1.е.,
|E(w)|? < |E(0)|?, the second-harmonic polarization-density component Py, (2w) is
negligible in comparison with the components Py,(0) and Py, (w). This is equivalent
to the linearization of Py, as a function of €, i.e., approximating it by a straight line
with a slope equal to the derivative at € = Е(0), as illustrated in Fig. 22.2-5.

Рут, ,
ти... ДА +9
РЕ E(w) |
: Bakara
a
Figure 22.2-5 Linearization of the second-order nonlinear relation Py;, = 2d€? in the presence
of a strong electric field Е(0) and a weak optical field E(w).

Equation (22.2-9b) provides a linear relation between Py, (№) and E(w), which we
write in the form Py, (w) = €,AxE(w), where Ay = (4d/e,)E(0) represents an
increase in the susceptibility proportional to the electric field Е (0). The corresponding
incremental change of the refractive index is obtained by differentiating the relation
n?=1+y, to obtain 2n An = Ay, from which

2d
An = — E(0). (22.2-10)
NEo
The medium is then effectively linear with a refractive index n + An that is linearly
controlled by the electric field E(0).

The nonlinear nature of the medium creates a coupling between the electric field
Е(0) and the optical field E(w), causing one to control the other, so that the nonlinear
medium exhibits the linear electro-optic effect (Pockels effect) discussed in Chapter 21.

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1025
This effect is characterized by the relation An = —1п13:Е (0), where г is the Pock-
els coefficient. Comparing this formula with (22.2-10), we conclude that the Pockels
coefficient r is related to the second-order nonlinear optical coefficient d by
4
re —— 4d. (22.2-11)
Eon
Though this expression reveals the common underlying origin of the Pockels effect
and the medium nonlinearity, it is not consistent with experimentally observed values
of r and d. This is because we have made the implicit assumption that the medium
is nondispersive (i.e., that its response is insensitive to frequency). This assumption is
clearly not satisfied when one of the components of the field is at the optical frequency
w and the other is a steady field with zero frequency. The role of dispersion is discussed
in Sec. 22.7.
C. Three-Wave Mixing
We now consider the case of a field €(¢) comprising two harmonic components at
optical frequencies ил and w,
E(t) = Re{ E(w 1) exp(jwit) + Е(&2) exp(jwet)}. (22.2-12)
(The spatial features of these waves will be considered shortly.) The nonlinear com-
ponent of the polarization density Py, = 2d€? then contains components at five
frequencies, 0, 2w 1, 2w2, Wi = Wy + Wo, and w_ = ил — W2, with amplitudes
Py (0) = а [|Е (1)? + |E(w2)|] (22.2-13a)
Py, (2w1) = d E(w) E(w) (22.2-13b)
Py, (2w2) = а E(w) Е (в) (22.2-13c)
Py (w+) = 2d E(w) E(w) (22.2-13d)
Ва (w_) = 2d E(w) E* (wo). (22.2-13e)
Thus, the second-order nonlinear medium can be used to mix two optical waves of
different frequencies and generate (among other things) a third wave at the difference
frequency or at the sum frequency. The former process is called frequency downcon-
version whereas the latter is known as frequency up-conversion or sum-frequency
generation. An example of frequency up-conversion is provided in Fig. 22.2-6: the
light from two lasers with free-space wavelengths Ло1 = 1.06 wm and Ло2 = 10.6 wm
enter а proustite crystal and generate a third wave with wavelength Аоз = 0.96 ит
(where Лой = Ap + Ase).
) A R= +
1.06 um 0.96 ym >
Proustite crystal
о
10.6 wm
Figure 22.2-6 An example of sum-frequency generation (SFG), also called frequency up-
conversion, in a nonlinear crystal.

1026 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS

Though the incident pair of waves at frequencies ил and w2 produce polarization
densities at frequencies 0, 21, 2%, ил + We, and ил — we, all of these waves are not
necessarily generated, since certain additional conditions (phase matching) must be
satisfied, as explained presently.

Frequency and Phase Matching
If waves | and 2 are plane waves with wavevectors k; and kg, so that Е (1) =
A, exp(—jk, -г) and E(w.) = Ag exp(—jke -r), then in accordance with (22.2-13d),
Py. (w3) = 2аЕ (ил) Е (we) = 2d. A; Ao exp(—jkg - г), where
ил + We = цз (22.2-14)
Frequency-Matching Condition
and
Phase-Matching Condition
The medium therefore acts as a light source of frequency w3 = ил +2, with a complex
amplitude proportional to exp(—jk3 - г), so that it radiates a wave of wavevector
Кз = К + ko, as illustrated in Fig. 22.2-7. Equation (22.2-15) can be regarded
as a condition of phase matching among the wavefronts of the three waves that is
analogous to the frequency-matching condition w; + wa = из. Since the argument of
the complex wavefunction is wt — К - г, these two conditions ensure both the temporal
and spatial phase matching of the three waves, which is necessary for their sustained
mutual interaction over extended durations of time and regions of space.
a7 "2
AAA HT ks Figure 22.2-7 The phase-
k .
} [АД ии | 3 SU matching condition.
kj k
~~ к 2
Three-Wave Mixing Modalities
When two optical waves of angular frequencies ил and wy» travel through a second-
order nonlinear optical medium they mix and produce a polarization density with
components at a number of frequencies. We assume that only the component at the
sum frequency w3 = w  и/2 satisfies the phase-matching condition. Other frequencies
cannot be sustained by the medium since they are assumed not to satisfy the phase-
matching condition.

Once wave 3 is generated, it interacts with wave 1 and generates a wave at the
difference frequency w2 = из — ил. Clearly, the phase-matching condition for this
interaction is also satisfied. Waves 3 and 2 similarly combine and radiate at ил. The
three waves therefore undergo mutual coupling in which each pair of waves interacts
and contributes to the third wave. The process is called three-wave mixing.

Two-wave mixing is not, in general, possible. Two waves of arbitrary frequencies
сл and wz cannot be coupled by the medium without the help of а third wave. Two-
wave mixing can occur only in the degenerate case, w2 = 2w 1, in which the second-
harmonic of wave 1 contributes to wave 2; and the subharmonic w2/2 of wave 2, which
is at the frequency difference w2 — ил, contributes to wave 1.

Three-wave mixing is known as a parametric interaction process. It takes a variety
of forms, depending on which of the three waves is provided as an input, and which
are extracted as outputs, as illustrated in the following examples (see Fig. 22.2-8):

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1027
= Optical Frequency Conversion (OFC). Waves 1 and 2 are mixed in an up-
converter, generating a wave at the sum frequency w3 = ил + We. This process,
also called sum-frequency generation (SFG), has already been illustrated in
Fig. 22.2-6. Second-harmonic generation (SHG) is a degenerate special case of
SFG. The opposite process of downconversion or difference-frequency gener-
ation (DFG) is realized by an interaction between waves 3 and 1 to generate wave
2, at the difference frequency w2 = из — ил. Up- and down-converters are used
to generate coherent light at wavelengths where no adequate lasers are available,
and as optical mixers in optical communication systems.
= Optical Parametric Amplifier (OPA). Waves 1 and 3 interact so that wave 1
grows, and in the process an auxiliary wave 2 is created. The device operates as
a coherent amplifier at frequency ил and is known аз an OPA. Wave 3, called
the pump, provides the required energy, whereas wave 2 is known as the idler
wave. The amplified wave is called the signal. Clearly, the gain of the amplifier
depends on the power of the pump. OPAs are used for the detection of weak light
at wavelengths for which sensitive detectors are not available.
= Optical Parametric Oscillator (OPO) . With proper feedback, the parametric
amplifier can operate as a parametric oscillator, in which only a pump wave is
supplied. OPOs are used for the generation of coherent light and mode-locked
pulse trains over a continuous range of frequencies, usually in frequency bands
where there is a paucity of tunable laser sources.
= Spontaneous Parametric Downconversion (SPDC) . Here, the only input to the
nonlinear crystal is the pump wave 3, and downconversion to the lower-frequency
waves 1 and 2 is spontaneous. The frequency- and phase-matching conditions
(22.2-14) and (22.2-15) lead to multiple solutions, each forming а pair of waves 1
and 2 with specific frequencies and directions. The downconverted light takes the
form of a cone of multispectral light, as illustrated in Fig. 22.2-8.
Further details pertaining to these parametric devices are provided in Sec. 22.4.
Signal w, a р № Up-converted signal
OFC impo ———_ и = wy +42
Pump 2
_ Idler Filter
Signal wy с — 422 => Amplified signal
OPA р Иж ши >”
Pump w3
OPO —
Mirror Mirror
wy
SPDC р _ о
а ide “2
Figure 22.2-8 Optical parametric devices in bulk crystals or integrated waveguides: optical
frequency converter (OFC); optical parametric amplifier (OPA); optical parametric oscillator (OPO);
spontaneous parametric downconverter (SPDC). Fiber lasers, laser diodes, quantum cascade lasers,
and diode-pumped solid-state lasers often serve as pumps for optical parametric devices.

1028 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
Wave Mixing as a Photon Interaction Process
The three-wave-mixing process can be viewed from a photon-optics perspective as
a process of three-photon interaction in which two photons of lower frequency, w
and wy», are annihilated, and a photon of higher frequency ws is created, as illustrated
in Fig. 22.2-9(a). Alternatively, the annihilation of a photon of high frequency ws is
accompanied by the creation of two low-frequency photons, of frequencies ил and wo,
as illustrated in Fig. 22.2-9(6). Since Aw and hk are the energy and momentum of a
photon of frequency w and wavevector k (see Sec. 13.1), conservation of energy and
momentum, in either case, requires that
Пил + hw, = hws (22.2-16)
hk, + hike = hks, (22.2-17)
where kj, ko, and Кз are the wavevectors of the three photons. The frequency- and
phase-matching conditions presented in (22.2-14) and (22.2-15) are thus reproduced.

The energy diagram for the three-photon-mixing process displayed in Fig. 22.2-
9(6) bears some similarity to that for an optically pumped three-level laser, illustrated
in Fig. 22.2-9(c) (see Sec. 15.2B). There are significant distinctions between the two
processes, however:

= One of the three transitions involved in the laser process is non-radiative.

= An exchange of energy between the field and medium takes place in the laser

process.

= The energy levels associated with the laser process are relatively sharp and are

established by the atomic or molecular system, whereas the energy levels of the
parametric process are dictated by photon energy and phase-matching conditions
and are tunable over wide spectral regions.

hw, А |. hw on \ vo.

NV  —ao—] fiw, VW hw) -т-- fw.) |
oe mai] My me : fren transition
hw hwy >
(a) (b) (©)

Figure 22.2-9 Comparison of parametric processes in a second-order nonlinear medium and laser
action. (a) Annihilation of two low-frequency photons and creation of one high-frequency photon.
Dashed lines indicate virtual states. (b) Annihilation of one high-frequency photon and creation of
two low-frequency photons. (c) Optically pumped 3-level laser, a nonparametric process in which the
medium participates in energy transfer.

The process of wave mixing involves an energy exchange among the interacting
waves. Clearly, energy must be conserved, as is assured by the frequency-matching
condition, w, + w2 = из. Photon numbers must also be conserved, consistent with the
photon interaction. Consider the photon-splitting process represented in Fig. 22.2-9(6).
If A®,;, АФ., and АФ: are the net changes in the photon fluxes (photons per second)
in the course of the interaction (the flux of photons leaving minus the flux of photons
entering) at frequencies ил, wo, and из, then AD; = АФ. = —AQs, so that for each
of the w3 photons lost, one each of the ил and wz photons is gained.

If the three waves travel in the same direction, the z direction for example, then
by taking a cylinder of unit area and incremental length Az — 0 as the interaction
volume, we conclude that the photon-flux densities фл, фо, ¢3 (photons/s-m?) of the
three waves must satisfy

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1029
dor = 92 = _ 993. (22.2-18)
dz dz dz Photon-Number
Conservation
Since the wave intensities (W/m?) are J, = hw 1¢1, Ig = hwode, and [3 = hw33,
(22.2-18) gives
Ч (2) = a (2) = fo (2) . (22.2-19)
dz \ бл dz \ и dz \ из Manley—Rowe
Relations
Equations (22.2-19) are known as the Manley—Rowe relations. It was first derived in
the context of wave interactions in nonlinear electronic systems. The Manley—Rowe
relations can be derived using wave optics, without invoking the concept of the photon
(Exercise 22.4-2).
D. Phase Matching and Tuning Curves
Phase Matching in Collinear Three-Wave Mixing
If the mixed three waves are collinear, i.e., they travel in the same direction, and if
the medium is nondispersive, then the phase-matching condition (22.2-15) yields the
scalar equation nw, /со + nwe/Co = nw 3/Co, which is automatically satisfied if the
frequency matching condition ил +w2 = из is met. However, since all materials are in
actuality dispersive, the three waves actually travel at different velocities corresponding
to different refractive indices, пл, N2, and пз, and the frequency- and phase-matching
conditions are independent:
Matching
Conditions
and must be simultaneously satisfied. Since this is usually not possible, birefringence,
which is a feature of anisotropic media, is often used to compensate dispersion.

For an anisotropic medium, the three refractive indices пл, n2, and пз are generally
dependent on the polarizations of the waves and their directions relative to the principal
axes (see Sec. 6.3C). This offers other degrees of freedom to satisfy the matching
conditions. Precise control of the refractive indices at the three frequencies is often
achieved by appropriate selection of polarization, orientation of the crystal, and in some
cases by temperature control.

For an optical waveguide, the phase-matching condition (22.2-15) should be re-
placed with В: + 62 = Вз, which relates the propagation constants of the waveguide
modes at the wavelengths of the three mixed waves. These propagation constants
depend on the refractive indices of the waveguide material, the polarization (TE or
TM), and the waveguide geometry and dimensions (see Sec. 9.2A). These additional
degrees of freedom offer more flexibility in satisfying the phase-matching condition.

In practice, the medium is often a uniaxial crystal characterized by its optic axis and
frequency-dependent ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices n(w) and пе (&).
Each of the three waves can be ordinary (0) or extraordinary (e) and the process is
labeled accordingly. For example, the label e-o-o indicates that waves 1, 2, and 3 are
e, о, and о waves, respectively. For ап о wave, n(w) = n,(w); for an e wave, n(w) =
n(0, w) depends on the angle 6 between the direction of the wave and the optic axis of
the crystal, in accordance with the relation

1030 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
2 +2
1 _ cos’? | sin’ @ (22.2-21)
т? (0,42) ng(w) ne (w)
which is represented graphically by an ellipse [see (6.3-15) and Fig. 6.3-7]. If the
polarizations of the signal and idler waves are the same, the wave mixing is said to be
'Туре-Г; if they are orthogonal, it is said to be Type-II.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 22.2-1. СоПтеаг Туре-! Second-Harmonic Generation (SHG). For SHG,
waves 1 and 2 have the same frequency (ил = we = w) and из = 2w. For Type-I mixing, waves 1
and 2 have identical polarizations so that ny = ng. Therefore, from (22.2-20), the phase-matching
condition 1$ n3 = nz, 1.е., the fundamental wave has the same refractive index as the second-harmonic
wave. Because of dispersion, this condition cannot usually be satisfied unless the polarizations of
these two waves are different. For a uniaxial crystal, the process is either 0-o-e or e-e-o. In either
case, the direction at which the wave enters the crystal is adjusted in such a way that n3 = nj, Le.,
such that birefringence compensates exactly for dispersion.
S13
по) Е Qw
277 aT —< < 45)
п(0) и .>
7 о

se No и SS \
--7 : | е
ТТ RP

\ / / w

\ /

Ww 2% <“ = Ta Us

=> рее
(а) (b) (c)

Figure 22.2-10 Phase matching in e-e-o SHG. (a) Matching the index of the e wave at w with
that of the o wave at 2w. (b) Index surfaces at w (solid curves) and 2w (dashed curves) for a uniaxial
crystal. (с) The wave is chosen to travel at an angle @ with respect to the crystal optic axis, such that
the extraordinary refractive index n,(0,w) of the w wave equals the ordinary refractive index n,(2w)
of the 2w wave.

For an e-e-o process such as that illustrated in Fig. 22.2-10, the fundamental wave is extraordinary
and the second-harmonic wave is ordinary, п: = n(0,w) and пз = n,(2w), so that the matching
condition is: n(0,w) = n,(2w). This is achieved by selecting an angle 9 for which

n(O,w) = no(2w), (22.2-22)

SHG Туре-1 е-е-о

where n(@,w) is given by (22.2-21). This is illustrated graphically in Fig. 22.2-10, which displays

the ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices (a circle and an ellipse) at w (solid curves) and at

2w (dashed curves). The angle at which phase matching is satisfied is that at which the circle at 2w
intersects the ellipse at w.

As an example, for КОР at a fundamental wavelength Л = 694 nm, n,(w) = 1.506, п. (м) = 1.466;
and at A/2 = 347 nm, no(2w) = 1.534, n.(2w) = 1.490. In this case, (22.2-22) and (22.2-21) gives
9 = 52°. This is called the cut angle of the crystal. Similar equations may be written for SHG in the
o-o-e configuration. In this case, for КОР at a fundamental wavelength \ = 1.06 wm, 9 = 41°.
EXAMPLE 22.2-2. Collinear Optical Parametric Oscillator (OPO). The oscillation fre-
quencies of an OPO are determined from the frequency and phase-matching conditions. For a Type-I
0-0-е mixing configuration,

Wy + We = из, тол) + WeNo(W2) = w3n(O, из). (22.2-23)
OPO Туре-1 о-о-е

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1031
For Туре-П e-o-e mixing,
ил + we = из, ит (0, ил) + WoNo(W2) = w3n(O, из). (22.2-24)
OPO Туре-1 е-о-е
1.6 1.6
14 14
Е . Я
Е Signal (0)
а 1-0 Signal = 12 uae S12
ЕЕ 5 5,
Idler 5 |0 510
ol ©"!
Ритр Е Е
Signal (е)
0.6
22 22.5 3 065 30 40 50
Crystal cut angle 0 (deg) Crystal cut angle 6 (deg)
(а) (Б)
Figure 22.2-11 Tuning curves for a collinear OPO using a BBO crystal and а 532-nm pump,
which is readily obtained from a frequency doubled Nd:YAG laser (а) Type-I, and (b) Туре-П.

The functions n,(w) and n.(w) are determined from the Sellmeier equation (5.5-28), and the
extraordinary index n(@,w) is determined as a function of the angle 0 between the optic axis of
the crystal and the direction of the waves by use of (22.2-21). For a given pump frequency ws, the
solutions of (22.2-23) and (22.2-24), ил and we, are often plotted versus the angle 0, a plot known as
the tuning curve. Examples are illustrated in Fig. 22.2-11.
тии |
Phase Matching т Non-Collinear Three-Wave Mixing
In the non-collinear case, the phase-matching condition К! + kp = kg is equivalent to
WNW, + 2122 = wW3NZU3, Where 1, U2, and tz are unit vectors in the directions
of propagation of the waves. The refractive indices n1, п2, and пз depend on the
directions of the waves relative to the crystal axes, as well as the polarizations and
frequencies. This vector equation is equivalent to two scalar equations so that the
matching conditions become

ил +We = из, WN}, sin 91 = Weng sin 95, WN, COS 0; + шп COS 05 = W3N3,

(22.2-25)
where 091 and 05 are the angles waves 1 and 2 make with wave 3. The design of a
3-wave mixing device centers about the selection of directions and polarizations to
satisfy these equations, as demonstrated by the following exercise and example.
И
EXERCISE 22.2-1
Non-Collinear Туре-И Second-Harmonic Generation (SHG). Figure 22.2-12 illustrates
Туре-П о-е-е non-collinear SHG. An ordinary wave and an extraordinary wave, both at the
fundamental frequency w, create an extraordinary second-harmonic wave at the frequency 2w. It
is assumed here that the directions of propagation of the three waves and the optic axis are coplanar
and the two fundamental waves and the optic axis make angles 91, 05, and 9 with the direction of the
second-harmonic wave. The refractive indices that appear in the phase-matching equations (22.2-25)
are Ny = No(w), п2 = nN(O + O2,w), and пз = n(6, 2w), ie.,
No(w) sin 01 = п(0- 65, w) sin 65, No(w) cos 01 + n(A + 65, >) cos 65 = 2n(O,2w). (22.2-26)
SHG Туре-1 о-е-е

1032 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
For а КОР crystal and a fundamental wave of wavelength 1.06 ит (Nd?*:YAG laser), determine the
crystal orientation and the angles 6; and 05 for efficient second-harmonic generation.
Ww
e 91 2%
> =) Figure 22.2-12 Non-collinear Туре-П second-
92 e harmonic generation.
Ww Of optic Axis
-—"T 0
ee
ини |
EXAMPLE 22.2-3. Spontaneous Parametric Downconversion (SPDC). In SPDC, а
pump wave of frequency w3 creates pairs of waves | and 2, at frequencies ил and wy», and angles 6,
and 05, all satisfying the frequency- and phase-matching conditions (22.2-25). For example, in the
Type-I 0-0-e case, пл = No(w1), Ng = No(W2) and пз = n(O,w3). These relations together with the
Sellmeier equations for n,(w) and n.(w) yield a continuum of solutions (w1,61), (we, 42) for the
signal and idler waves, as illustrated by the example in Fig. 22.2-13.
6
0
и
wy R a A>
Se, 3°
—-- Г <
4 (w2, 02)
02 -------%
#4
09 1.0 1.1
Normalized frequency
Figure 22.2-13 Tuning curves for non-collinear Type-I о-0-е spontaneous parametric downcon-
version in a BBO crystal at an angle 9 = 33.53° for a 351.5-nm pump (from an Art-ion laser). Each
point in the bright area of the middle picture represents the frequency ил and angle 91 of a possible
downconverted wave, and has a matching point at a complementary frequency w2 = из — w, with
angle 02. Frequencies are normalized to the degenerate frequency и» = w3/2. For example, the two
dots shown represent a pair of downconverted waves at frequencies 0.9%. and 1.1w,. Because of
circular symmetry, each point is actually a ring of points all of the same frequency, but each point on
a ring matches only one diametrically opposite point on the corresponding ring, as illustrated in the
right graph.
ини |
Tolerable Phase Mismatch and Coherence Length
A slight phase mismatch Ak = k3—k,—k2 = 0 may result in a significant reduction in
the wave-mixing efficiency. If waves 1 and 2 are plane waves with wavevectors k, and
Ко, so that Е (1) = A; exp(—jki -r) and E(w2) = Ag exp(—jk2-r), then in accord-
ance with (22.2-13d), Ру, (из) = 2d (ил) Е (we) = 2d A; Ao exp[—j (ki + ke) - r] =
2d.A; А› exp(jAk - г) exp(—jkg - г). By virtue of (22.1-7) this creates a source with
angular frequency w3, wavevector Кз, and complex amplitude 2w31,d A; Аз ехр(7ДК:
r). It can be shown (Prob. 22.2-6) that the intensity of the generated wave is propor-
tional to the squared integral of the source amplitude over the interaction volume У,
2
[3 x ] dA, Ao exp(jAk - г) ar . (22.2-27)
У
Because the contributions of different points within the interaction volume are added
as phasors, the position-dependent phase Ak-r in the phase mismatched case results in
a reduction of the total intensity below the value obtained in the matched case. Consider

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1033
the special case of a one-dimensional interaction volume of length L in the z direction:
13 x | f.’ exp(jAk z)dz|? = L? sinc?(Ak L/2m), where Ak is the z component of
Ak and sinc(a) = sin(ma)/(7x). It follows that in the presence of a wavevector
mismatch Ak, 13 is reduced by the factor sinc?(AkL/27), which is unity for Ak = 0
and drops as Ak increases, reaching a value of (2/7)? == 0.4 when |Ak| = 7/L, and
vanishing when |Ak| = 27/L (Fig. 22.2-14). For a given value of Г, the mismatch
Ak corresponding to a prescribed efficiency reduction factor is inversely proportional
to Г, so that the phase-matching requirement becomes more stringent as Г, increases.
For a given mismatch Ak, the length

Ге = 2n/|Ak| (22.2-28)

Coherence Length

is a measure of the maximum length within which the parametric interaction process
is efficient; L, is often called the wave-mixing coherence length.

For example, for a second-harmonic generation |Ak| = 2(27/A,)|n3 — пл|, where
Xo is the free-space wavelength of the fundamental wave and n; and ng are the re-
fractive indices of the fundamental and the second-harmonic waves. In this case, LD, =
Ло/2|пз — пл| is inversely proportional to |пз — n1|, which is governed by the material
dispersion. For example, for | из — пи |= 1077, ZL. = 50).

sinc2(Ak L/27)
Figure 22.2-14 The factor by which
the efficiency of three-wave mixing is
reduced as a result of a phase mismatch
Ak L between waves interacting within a
distance L.
-40 -20 0 Qa 4п AKL

The tolerance of the interaction process to the phase mismatch can be regarded
as a result of the wavevector uncertainty Ak сх 1/Г associated with confinement
of the waves within a distance Г, [see (A.2-6) in Appendix A]. The corresponding
momentum uncertainty Ap = ВАК сх 1/L explains the apparent violation of the law
of conservation of momentum in the wave-mixing process.

Phase-Matching Bandwidth

As previously noted, for a finite interaction length L, a phase mismatch |Ak| < 27/L
is tolerated. If exact phase matching is achieved at a set of nominal frequencies of the
mixed waves, then small frequency deviations from those values may be tolerated, as
long as the condition ил + w2 = ws is perfectly satisfied. The spectral bands associated
with such tolerance are established by the condition |Ak| < 27/L.

As an example, in SHG we have two waves with frequencies w, = w and из = 2w.
The mismatch Ak is a function Ak(w) of the fundamental frequency w. The device
is designed for exact phase matching at a nominal fundamental frequency wo, 1.е.,
Ak(wo) = 0. The bandwidth Aw is then established by the condition |Ak(wo+Aw)| =
2п /Г.. If Aw is sufficiently small, we may write Ak(wo + Aw) = Ak’Aw, where
Ak’ = (d/dw)Ak at wo. Therefore, Aw = 27/|Ak’|L, from which the spectral width
in Hz is

Av = 1/\Ak'|L. (22.2-29)
Phase-Matching Bandwidth

1034 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS

Since Ak(w) = k3(2w) —2k1(w), the derivative Ak’ = dk3(2w) /dw—2dky(w) /dw
= 2[dk3(2w)/d(2w) — dky(w)/dw] = 2[1/v3 — 1/1], where ит and v3 are the group
velocities of waves 1 and 3 at frequencies w and 2w, respectively (see Sec. 5.7). The
spectral width is therefore related to the length Г, and the group velocity mismatch by

ИЕР о 1
м = (22.2-30)
2/03 U1 2L [№ — № Phase-Matching Bandwidth
where Nj, and № are the group indices of the material at the fundamental and second-
harmonic frequencies.

It is apparent that second-harmonic generation of a broadband wave, or an ultra-
narrow pulse (see Sec. 23.5A), can be accomplished by use of a thin crystal (at a
cost of lower conversion efficiency), and by the use of an additional design constraint,
group velocity matching, v3 = v, or N3 = М1. Phase-matching tolerance in SPDC is
revealed in Fig. 22.2-13 by the thickness of the curves.

E. Quasi-Phase Matching

In the presence of a wavevector mismatch Ak, points within the interaction volume
radiate with position-dependent phases Ak - r, so that the magnitude of the generated
parametric wave is significantly reduced. Since phase matching can be difficult to
achieve, or can severely constrain the choice of the nonlinear optical coefficient or the
crystal configuration that maximizes the efficiency of wave conversion, one approach
is to allow a phase mismatch, but to compensate it by using a medium with position-
dependent periodic nonlinearity. Such periodicity introduces an opposite phase that
brings back the phases of the distributed radiation elements into better alignment. The
technique is called quasi-phase matching (QPM).

If the medium has a position-dependent nonlinear optical coefficient d(r), then
(22.2-27) becomes 9

3 x ] d(r) exp(jAk - rar ; (22.2-31)

у
If d(r) is а harmonic function d(r) = d, exp(—jG-r), with G = Ak, then the phase
mismatch is fully eliminated. Accordingly, the phase-matching condition (22.2-15) is
replaced with

ki + К + G=ks. (22.2-32)
In effect, the nonlinear medium serves as а phase grating (ог longitudinal Bragg grat-
ing) with a wavevector G.

It is generally difficult to fabricate a medium with a continuously varying harmonic
nonlinear optical coefficient, d(r) = d,exp(—jG - г), but it is possible to fabricate
simpler periodic structures, e.g., media with nonlinear optical coefficients of constant
magnitude but periodically reversed sign. Since any periodic function can be decom-
posed into a superposition of harmonic functions via Fourier series, one such function
can serve to correct the phase mismatch, with the others playing no role in the wave-
mixing process because they introduce greater phase mismatch.

QPM in Collinear Wave Mixing
For collinear waves traveling in the z direction and having a phase mismatch Ak, the
required phase grating is of the form exp(—jGz), where G = Ak. Such a grating

22.2 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1035
may be obtained by use of a periodic nonlinear optical coefficient d(z) described by
the Fourier series d(z) = У х dm exp(—j2mmz/A), where A is the period and
{d,,} are the Fourier coefficients. Any of these components may be used for phase
matching. For example, for the mth harmonic, G = m27/A = Ak, so that

A=m2r/Ak = те, (22.2-33)
QPM Condition
1.е., the grating period A equals an integer multiple of the coherence length Г. =
2a /Ak.
Equation (22.2-32) together with the frequency matching condition yield
wy + 2 = из, шит + ит» + т2пс/А = w3N3. (22.2-34)
QPM Tuning Curves
These equations are used in lieu of (22.2-20) to determine the tuning curves and the
crystal angles in the design of parametric devices. It is evident that QPM offers some
flexibility in the design of desired tuning curves.
QPM in a Medium with Periodically Reversed Nonlinear Coefficient
The simplest periodic pattern of the nonlinear optical coefficient d(z) alternates be-
tween two constant values, +d, and —d,, at distances A/2, as shown in Fig. 22.2-15.
— A —
у | у | у ty | ' | у | у | — Figure 22.2-15 A nonlinear crystal with
-_——— sy ич periodically varying nonlinear optical coeffi-
d(2) р | | | | | | | cient d(z) of period Л.
-dy -
The physical mechanism by which the periodic reversal of the sign of nonlinearity
compensates the position-dependent phase of the radiation is illustrated in Fig. 22.2-16
for т = 1, 1.е., when the grating period A equals the coherence length LD. = 27/Ak.
z=0 z=7/Ak =A/2 z=2n/Ak =A
PPP PPI DIP PP PDP PP юьььх
(a) Phase matched
z=0 п/АК 2n/Ak
z=0
X
Se
(b) Phase mismatched (c) Quasi-phase matched
Figure 22.2-16 Phasors of the waves radiated by incremental elements at different positions z
in the nonlinear medium. (a) In the phase-matched case (Ak = 0) the phasors are all aligned and
maximum conversion efficiency is attained. (5) In the presence of a phase mismatch Ak, the phasors
are misaligned and the efficiency is significantly reduced. (c) In the quasi-phase matched case, the
misaligned phasors are periodically reversed by reversing the sign of the nonlinear optical coefficient
at intervals of A/2. The conversion efficiency is partially restored.

1036 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS

The improvement of the conversion efficiency afforded by QPM may be determined
quantitatively as follows. In accordance with Fourier-series theory, dj,, = (2/mz)do,
for odd m, and zero, otherwise. If phase matching is accomplished via the mth har-
monic, 1.е., A = тГе, then the parametric conversion efficiency is proportional to
d?, = (2/пт)? 42. By contrast, a homogeneous medium with nonlinear optical coeffi-
cient d, and the same length L, but with wavevector mismatch Ak, has a conversion ef-
ficiency 42 sinc?(AkL/2m) = а? sinc?(L/L.), which falls as (d?/7?)(L./L)? when
L > Ге. Since Г. = A/m, the improvement of conversion efficiency is by a factor
of 4(L/A)?; it is proportional to the square of the number of periods of the periodic
structure. Clearly, the use of a periodic medium can offer a significant improvement in
conversion efficiency.

The most challenging aspect of quasi-phase matching is the fabrication of the pe-
riodic nonlinear structure. A uniform nonlinear crystal may be altered periodically by
reversing the principal axis direction in alternating layers, thereby creating a d coeffi-
cient with alternating sign. This may be implemented by lithographically exposing the
crystal to a periodic electric field that reverses the direction of the crystal’s permanent
electric polarization, a technique called poling. This approach has been applied to
ferroelectric crystals such as LiTaO3, KTP, and LiNbOs; indeed, the latter has spawned
a technology known as periodically poled lithium niobate (PPLN). Semiconductor
crystals such as GaAs also have been used for the same purpose.

Periodic poling has also been implemented in integrated nonlinear optical wave-
guides. For example, PPLN waveguides may be fabricated by Ti-indiffusion at high
temperatures or by annealed proton exchange. Ridge waveguides may be cut in PPLN
by reactive ion etching. Single-mode waveguides are typically used to enhance the effi-
ciency of wave mixing. An illustration of second-harmonic generation in a periodically
poled, nonlinear waveguide is provided in Fig. 22.2-17. For example, a z-cut LiINbO3
ridge waveguide of 1-~m height and 5-zm width can operate in a single TM mode at
a wavelengths of 1550 nm or shorter. Poling periods of the order of 10-15 ит achieve
quasi-phase matching for second-harmonic generation at this wavelength.

775 nm
—
Ae Figure 22.2-17 Schematic of second-
а harmonic generation in а periodically
7 7 poled, integrated, nonlinear ridge wave-
a guide.
1550 nm =e
22.3 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS
In media possessing centrosymmetry, the second-order nonlinear term in (22.1-5) is
absent since the polarization must reverse when the electric field reverses. The domi-
nant nonlinearity is then of third order,

(Fig. 22.3-1) and the material is called a third-order nonlinear medium or a Kerr
medium. Kerr media respond to optical fields by generating third harmonics and sums

and differences of triplets of frequencies.

22.3 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1037
Тм,
Figure 22.3-1 Third-order nonlinearity
E in a Kerr medium.
ee
EXERCISE 22.3-1
Third-Order Nonlinear optical Media Exhibit the Kerr Electro-Optic Effect. Consider a
monochromatic optical field E(w) incident on a third-order nonlinear medium in the presence of a
steady electric field Е(0). The optical field is taken to be much smaller than the electric field, so that
|E(w)|? < |E(0)|?. Use (22.3-1) to show that the component of Py, at frequency w is approximately
given by Py,(w) = 12y°) E?(0)E(w). Demonstrate that this component of the polarization density
is equivalent to a refractive-index change An = —4sn*E?(0), where
12
s=—-—— y). (22.3-2)
Eon
The proportionality between the refractive-index change and the squared electric field is the Kerr
(quadratic) electro-optic effect described in Sec. 21.1A, where s is the Kerr coefficient [see (21.1-5)].
НИ
А. Third-Harmonic Generation (THG) and Optical Kerr Effect
Third-Harmonic Generation (THG)
In accordance with (22.3-1), the response of a third-order nonlinear medium to a
monochromatic optical field E(t) = Re{ E(w) exp(jwt)} is a nonlinear polarization
density Py,(t) containing a component at frequency w and another at frequency 3w:
Py. (w) = 3x) |E(w)/? E(w) (22.3-3a)
Py, (3w) = х®) E(w). (22.3-3b)
The presence of a component of polarization density at the frequency 3w in (22.3-
3b) indicates that third-harmonic light is generated. In most cases, however, the en-
ergy conversion efficiency is low. Indeed, THG is often achieved via second-harmonic
generation followed by sum-frequency generation of the fundamental and second-
harmonic waves (an example is provided in Sec. 15.3B).
Optical Kerr Effect
The polarization-density component at frequency w in (22.3-3a) corresponds to an
incremental change of the susceptibility Ay at frequency w given by
Pyy(w
cody = BE) 3,0 Выр = Onl, 223-4)
E(w)
where Г = |E(w)|?/2rn is the optical intensity of the initial wave [see (5.4-8)]. Since
п? = 1+ x, we have 2nAn = Ay so the incremental susceptibility change is
equivalent to an incremental refractive-index change An = Ay/2n:
3
An = 21 yr = nol, (22.3-5)
Eon

1038 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
where
3
ng = № х®. (22.3-6)
n"€o Optical Kerr Coefficient
Thus, the change in the refractive index An is proportional to the optical intensity Г.
The overall refractive index is therefore a linear function’ of the optical intensity,
п(Г) = n+ nol. (22.3-7)
Optical Kerr Effect

The proportionality of An to J is known as the optical Kerr effect because of its
similarity to the electro-optic Kerr effect discussed in Exercise 22.3-1 and Sec. 21.1A,
wherein An is proportional to the square of the steady electric field. The optical Kerr
effect is a self-induced effect in which the phase velocity of the wave depends on the
wave’s own intensity. It is an example of nonlinear refraction.

The order of magnitude of the coefficient nz (in units of ст? ЛМ) 15 10-16 to 1074 in
glasses, 10~!4 to 10-7 in doped glasses, 10~!° to 10-8 in organic materials, and 10—10
to 10-2? in semiconductors. It is sensitive to the operating wavelength (see Sec. 22.7)
and depends on the polarization.

B. Self-Phase Modulation (SPM), Self-Focusing, and Spatial Solitons
Self-Phase Modulation (SPM)
As aresult of the optical Kerr effect, an optical wave traveling in a third-order nonlinear
medium undergoes self-phase modulation (SPM). The phase shift incurred by an
optical beam of power Р and cross-sectional area A, traveling a distance Г in the
medium, is ф = —n(I)koL = —2an(I)L/rA, = —2n(n + noP/A)L/Xo. Thus, the
change in phase arising from the optical Kerr effect is
L
Ag = —2m7n2— P 22.3-8
Ф пп ro A ’ ( )

which is proportional to the optical power Р. Self-phase modulation is useful in appli-
cations in which light controls light.

To maximize the effect, Г, should be large and A small. These requirements are well
served by the use of optical waveguides. The optical power at which Ay = —z7 is
attained is P,; = Ло А/2Глт>. A doped glass fiber of length Г, = 1 m, cross-sectional
area А = 10-2 mm?, and nz = 10~!° cm?/W, operating at \, = 1 um, for example,
switches the phase by a factor of 7 at an optical power P, = 0.5 W. Materials with
larger values of п2 can be used in centimeter-long channel waveguides to achieve а
phase shift of 7 at powers of a few mW.

Phase modulation may thence be converted into intensity modulation by employing
one of the schemes used in conjunction with electro-optic modulators (see Sec. 21.1B):
(1) using an interferometer (Mach—Zehnder, for example); (2) using the difference
between the modulated phases of the two polarization components (birefringence) as
a wave retarder placed between crossed polarizers; or (3) using an integrated-photonic
directional coupler (Sec. 9.4B). The result is an all-optical modulator in which a weak
optical beam may be controlled by an intense optical beam. All-optical switches are
discussed in Sec. 24.3С.

1 Equation (22.3-7) is sometimes written in the alternative form, (Г) = n+ п2|Е|? /2, where no differs
from (22.3-6) by the factor 7.

22.3 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1039
Self-Focusing
Another important effect associated with self-phase modulation is self-focusing. If an
intense optical beam is transmitted through a thin sheet of nonlinear material exhibiting
the optical Kerr effect, as illustrated in Fig. 22.3-2, the refractive-index change mimics
the intensity pattern in the transverse plane. If the beam has its highest intensity at the
center, for example, the maximum change of the refractive index is also at the center.
The sheet then acts as a graded-index medium that imparts to the wave a nonuniform
phase shift, thereby causing wavefront curvature. Under certain conditions the medium
can act as a lens with a power-dependent focal length, as shown in Exercise 22.3-2.
Kerr-lens focusing is useful for laser mode locking, as discussed in Sec. 16.4D.
x d
Е и
7 Figure 22.3-2 А Шиа-ог4ег nonlinear
> medium acts as a lens whose focusing power
1 6 depends on the intensity of the incident beam.
Bn Nonlinear
medium
ee
EXERCISE 22.3-2
Optical Kerr Lens. An optical beam traveling in the 2 direction is transmitted through a thin
sheet of nonlinear optical material exhibiting the optical Kerr effect, п(Г) = п + п>Г. The sheet
lies in the т-у plane and has a small thickness d so that its complex amplitude transmittance is
exp(—jnk,d), as shown in (2.4-3). The beam has an approximately planar wavefront and an intensity
distribution I = Ip[1—(x?+-y?)/W?] at points near the beam axis (x, у < И’), where Jp is the peak
intensity and W is the beam width. Show that the medium acts as a thin lens with a focal length that
is inversely proportional to Го. Hint: A lens of focal length f has a complex amplitude transmittance
proportional to exp[jk(x? + y?)/2f], as shown in (2.4-9) [see also Exercise 2.4-6].
ee
Spatial Solitons
When an intense optical beam travels through a substantial thickness of nonlinear
homogeneous medium, rather than a thin sheet, the refractive index is altered nonuni-
formly so that the medium can act as a graded-index waveguide. Thus, the beam can
create its own waveguide. If the intensity of the beam has the same spatial distribution
in the transverse plane as one of the modes of the waveguide that the beam itself
creates, the beam propagates self-consistently without changing its spatial distribution.
Under these conditions, diffraction is compensated by self-phase modulation, and the
beam is confined to its self-created waveguide. Such self-guided beams are called
spatial solitons. Analogous behavior occurs in the time domain when group velocity
dispersion is compensated by self-phase modulation. As discussed in Sec. 23.5B, this
leads to the formation of temporal solitons, which travel without changing shape.

The self-guiding of light in an optical Kerr medium is described mathematically by
the Helmholtz equation, V?7E + n7(I)k?E = 0, where n(I) = п + nal, Ко = w/co,
and Г = |E|?/2n. This is a nonlinear differential equation in Е, which is simplified
by writing Е = A exp(—jkz), where К = nk,, and assuming that the envelope
А = А(т,2) varies slowly in the = direction (in comparison with the wavelength
A = 2” /К), and does not vary in the у direction (see Sec. 2.2C). Using the approxi-
mation (07/0z7)[A exp(—jkz)] = (—2jk 0A/0z—k? A) exp(—jkz), the Helmholtz

1040 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
equation becomes
OA ОА ого 9
De jak +k5[n*(1) —n“]A =0. (22.3-9)
Since the nonlinear effect is small (nol << n), we write
9 5 2ngn|Al? пп,
[7 (Р — n°] = [n(Z) — (р + п] = и Пщ = оо = 4!
о
(22.3-10)
so that (22.3-9) becomes
PA no OA
> + hk |APA = j2k—. 22.3-11
Ox? + No м 9; ( )
Equation (22.3-11) is known as the nonlinear Schrodinger equation. One of its
solutions is
x fz
A(x, 2) = Ao seeh( exp (=) ; (22.3-12)
Wo 429 Spatial Soliton
where W is a constant; sech(-) indicates the hyperbolic-secant function; Ао satisfies
п2( Аз /21ъ) = 1/2, so that AoW is a constant; and 2о = $kW¢ = rW3/d [this
is the same for the Rayleigh range of a Gaussian beam, as shown in (3.1-22)]. The
intensity distribution
|A(v, 2)? _ Ad a (_@
I = ——— = — sech* | — 22.3-13
(x, z) Dn an sec Wo ( )
is independent of z and has a width И, as illustrated in Fig. 22.3-3. The distribution
in (22.3-12) is the mode of a graded-index waveguide with a refractive index n +
nol = п + (1/k?We)sech?(x/Wo)], so that self-consistency is assured. Since Е =
Aexp(—jkz), the wave travels with a propagation constant К + 1/4z9 = k(1 +
d?/8n?W2) and phase velocity c/(1 + A?/8?W). The velocity is smaller than с
for localized beams (small Wo) but approaches с for large Иж.
Wo) Wo
< <
(а) (b)
Figure 22.3-3 Comparison of (a) a Gaussian beam traveling in a linear medium, and (6) a spatial
soliton (self-guided optical beam) traveling in a nonlinear medium.

22.3 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1041
Raman Gain
Much as the complex susceptibility х = x’ + jy” was constructed to accommodate
loss and gain in linear optics (Sec. 5.5), we follow suit with the third-order nonlinear
susceptibility х(), setting Хх) = xe ) +7 х®. The self-phase modulation in (22.3-8),
which is then also complex, may thus be written as
L бля х® Г
Avy = —2 РЕ РР. 22.3-14
А т? AoA
Consequently, the propagation phase factor e/” is а combination of phase shift, Ay =
— (6016 /€o) (x? /n?)(L/oA)P., and gain Gg = ехр(Ту»Г,), with a gain coefficient
given by’
(3)
12 1Р
Ye = eM (22.3-15)
© ТП AXA Raman Gain Coefficient
which is proportional to P/A.

The presence of such Raman gain arises from the pump field coherently driving the
nonlinear polarization density of the Raman medium. It permits power to be transferred
from the pump beam to the signal beam via an interaction between the light and the
vibrational modes of the Raman medium. This is in contrast to the gain arising from
population inversion in a stimulated-emission device, as discussed in Sec. 15.1. Raman
gain underlies the operation of a distributed Raman fiber amplifier (RFA), where the
pump and signal are both sent through the same fiber (Sec. 15.3D). When the gain
exceeds the loss, and appropriate feedback is provided, the Raman amplifier becomes
a Raman laser (Sec. 16.3C).

C. Cross-Phase Modulation (XPM)
We now consider the response of a third-order nonlinear medium to an optical field
comprising two monochromatic waves of angular frequencies ил and we, E(t) =
Re{ E(w1) exp(jwit)} + Ве{Е (42) exp(jwet)}. On substitution in (22.3-1), the com-
ponent Ру, (ил ) of the polarization density at frequency ил turns out to be
Ра (и) = x [ЗЕ (wi)? + 6] Е (>)? ] B(w1) - (22.3-16)
Assuming that the two waves have the same refractive index п, this relation may be
cast in the form Py, (ит) = 26 пАпЕ (ил), where
An = п2(П + 215), (22.3-17)
Cross-Phase Modulation
with nz = 3oy)/eon?. The quantities I, = |E(w1)|?/2n and 15 = |E(w2)|?/2n
are the intensities of waves | and 2, respectively. Therefore, wave | travels with an
effective refractive index n + An controlled by its own intensity as well as that of
wave 2. Wave 2 encounters a similar effect, so that the waves are coupled.
* The Raman gain coefficient is sometimes expressed in the form ye /(P/A), which has units of ст: 1.

1042 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
Since the phase shift encountered by wave 1 is modulated by the intensity of wave
2, this phenomenon is known as cross-phase modulation (XPM). It can result in the
contamination of information between optical communication channels at neighboring
frequencies, as in wavelength-division-multiplexing systems (WDM) (see Sec. 25.3C).
As we have seen in Sec. 22.2C, two-wave mixing is not possible in a second-
order nonlinear medium (except in the degenerate case). Note, however, that two-wave
mixing can occur in photorefractive media, as illustrated in Fig. 21.4-3.
ee
EXERCISE 22.3-3
Optical Kerr Effect in the Presence of Three Waves. Three monochromatic waves with
frequencies ил, wa, and ws travel in a third-order nonlinear medium. Determine the complex ат-
plitude of the component of Py, (Е) in (22.3-1) at frequency w,. Show that this wave travels with a
velocity со/ (п + An), where
An = no(Iy +2 + 213), (22.3-18)
and nz = ЗйоХ (9) /eon”, with I, = |E(w,)|?/2n, а = 1,2,3.
НИ
О. Four-Wave Mixing (FWM)
We now examine the case of four-wave mixing (FWM) in a third-order nonlinear
medium. We begin by determining the response of the medium to a superposition of
three waves of angular frequencies ил, w2, and из, with field
E(t) = Re{E(w1) exp(juit)} + Re{E(w2) exp(jwet)} + Re{E(w3) exp(jwst)}.
(22.3-19)
It is convenient to write €(¢) as а sum of six terms
E(t)= >` ТЕ) exp(jurt), (22.3-20)
g=+1,+2,43
where w_g = —w, and E(—w,) = E*(w,). Substituting (22.3-20) into (22.3-1), we
write Py, as а sum of 63 = 216 terms,
Put) =4х® »` E(w_)E (wr) E (wr) explj(wg + wp + wrt]. (22.3-21)
q,rt=+1,+2,+3
Thus, Py, is the sum of harmonic components of frequencies wW1,...,3w1,...,2W1
+ wo,..., Нал + wo + ws. The amplitude Py, (wg + в, + w;) of the component of
frequency wy + Ww, + ит can be determined by adding appropriate permutations of 4, т,
and | in (22.3-21). For example, Py, (ил + w2 — w3) involves six permutations,
Py, (wy + wo — из) = 6х9 E(w) E(w) E* (ws). (22.3-22)
Equation (22.3-22) indicates that four waves of frequencies ил, w2, w3, and wy are
mixed by the medium if wy = ил + и — ws, or
Wy two = из + wy. (22.3-23)
Frequency-Matching Condition
This equation constitutes the frequency-matching condition for FWM.

223 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1043

Assuming that waves 1, 2, and 3 are plane waves of wavevectors Ку, Ко, and ks, so
that E(w,) «x exp(—jk, -r),q = 1,2, 3, then (22.3-22) gives
Руа) x exp(—jki г) exp(—jk2 г) exp(jk3 -r) = exp[—j(ki + К2 — ks) -r],

(22.3-24)
so that wave 4 is also a plane wave with wavevector ky = k; + kg — kg, from which
ki + ko = Кз + Ка. (22.3-25)
Phase-Matching Condition
Equation (22.3-25) is the phase-matching condition for FWM.

Several FWM processes occur simultaneously, all satisfying the frequency and
phase-matching conditions. As shown before, waves 1, 2, and 3 interact and generate
wave 4, in accordance with (22.3-22). Similarly, waves 3, 4, and 1 interact and generate
wave 2, in accordance with

Py, (w2) = 6x) E(w3) E(w) E*(w1), (22.3-26)
and so on.

The FWM process may also be interpreted as an interaction between four photons.
A photon of frequency хз and another of of frequency w,4 are annihilated to create
a photon of frequency w; and another of frequency we, as illustrated in Fig. 22.3-4.
Equations (22.3-23) and (22.3-25) represent conservation of energy and momentum,
respectively.

< S ° tay 0007 °
@) 3 4 | №
Figure 22.3-4 Four-wave mixing (FWM): (a) phase-matching condition; (6) interaction of four
photons.
Three-Wave Mixing
In the partially degenerate case for which two of the four waves have the same fre-
quency, из = W4 = wo, we have three waves with frequencies related by
ил + Wo = 2%, (22.3-27)
so that the frequencies ил and we are symmetrically located with respect to the cen-
tral frequency wo, much like the sidebands of an amplitude modulated sine wave, ог
the Stokes and anti-Stokes frequencies in Raman scattering. The components of the
nonlinear polarization density at ил, we, and из include terms of the form
Py, (w) = 8x) Е? (из) E* (2), (22.3-28a)
Py, (>) = 8x) Е? (wg) Е* (ил), (22.3-28b)
Ра. (из) = 6x) E(w) E(w) E* (ws). (22.3-28c)

1044 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
These terms are responsible for three-wave mixing, 1.е., radiation at the frequency of
each wave generated by mixing of the other waves. These mixing processes may be
used for optical frequency conversion (OFC), optical parametric amplification (OPA)
and oscillation (OPO), and spontaneous parametric downconversion (SPDC), much
like three-wave mixing in second-order nonlinear media; the waves at ил, w2, and
из may be regarded as the signal, idler, and pump of the parametric process. Note,
however, that this three-wave mixing process involves four photons. For example, the
annihilation of two photons at wo and the creation of two photons at ил and we. An
example of OPA in a °°) medium, such as a silica-glass optical fiber, is illustrated in
Fig. 22.3-5.
Pump Pump
. ; Signal
Signal =“ м ( ) | | Idler
“1 у Pump wo Silica glass fiber “1 9
Figure 22.3-5 Three-wave, four-photon optical fiber parametric amplifier (OPA).
E. Optical Phase Conjugation (OPC)
The frequency-matching condition (22.3-23) is satisfied when all four waves are of the
same frequency:
Wy = Wo = W3 = Wy =. (22.3-29)
The process is then called degenerate four-wave mixing.
Assuming further that two of the waves (waves 3 and 4) are uniform plane waves
traveling in opposite directions,
E3(r) = A3 exp(—jks -r), E,4(r) = Алехр(—7Ка -r), (22.3-30)
with
Кл = —Кз, (22.3-31)
and substituting (22.3-30) and (22.3-31) into (22.3-26), we see that the polarization
density of wave 2 is 6х) Аз А. Е*(г). This term corresponds to a source emitting an
optical wave (wave 2) of complex amplitude
E_(r) « АзА4 Е (г). (22.3-32)
Phase Conjugation
Since Аз and Ад are constants, wave 2 is proportional to a conjugated version of
wave 1. The device serves as a phase conjugator. Waves 3 and 4 are called the pump
waves and waves | and 2 are called the probe and conjugate waves, respectively. As
will be demonstrated shortly, the conjugate wave is identical to the probe wave except
that it travels in the opposite direction. The phase conjugator is a special mirror that
reflects the wave back onto itself without altering its wavefronts.
To understand the phase conjugation process consider two simple examples:

22.3 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS 1045
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 22.3-1. Conjugate of a Plane Wave. If wave 1 is a uniform plane wave,
Е\(г) = Aj, exp(—jk, - г), traveling in the direction k,, then Е>(г) = Aj exp(jk, -r) is a
uniform plane wave traveling in the opposite direction kz = —k,, as illustrated in Fig. 22.3-
6(6). Thus, the phase-matching condition (22.3-25) is satisfied. The medium acts as a special
“mirror” that reflects the incident plane wave back onto itself, no matter what the angle of incidence.

1
he HY Figure 22.3-6 Reflection of a plane wave
from (a) an ordinary mirror and (6) a phase
conjugate mirror.
(а) (Ь)
EXAMPLE 22.3-2. Conjugate of a Spherical Wave. If wave | is а spherical wave centered
about the origin r = 0, Е! (г) « (1/r)exp(—jkr), then wave 2 has complex amplitude F2(r) o
(1/r) exp(+jkr). This is a spherical wave traveling backward and converging toward the origin, as
illustrated in Fig. 22.3-7(6).
I |A
ie ae \ Y Figure 22.3-7 Reflection of a spherical
<) > =a) ! Y wave from (а) an ordinary mirror and (0) a
9 aa ° |! 7 phase conjugate mirror.
\ Г” ь Z)
(a) (b)
«ПИ

Since ап arbitrary probe wave may be regarded as a superposition of plane waves
(see Chapter 4), each of which is reflected onto itself by the conjugator, the conjugate
wave is identical to the incident wave everywhere, except for a reversed direction of
propagation. The conjugate wave retraces the original wave by propagating backward,
maintaining the same wavefronts.

Phase conjugation is analogous to time reversal. This may be understood by
examining the field of the conjugate wave €(r,t) = Re{Fo(r)exp(jwt)} «
Re{ FE} (r) exp(jwt)}. Since the real part of a complex number equals the real part
of its complex conjugate, E2(r,t) сх Ве{ Е1 (г) exp(—jwt)}. Comparing this to the
field of the probe wave €)(r,t) = Ве{ Е1(г) exp(jwt)}, we readily see that one is
obtained from the other by the transformation # — —1t, so that the conjugate wave
appears as a time-reversed version of the probe wave.

The conjugate wave may catry more power than the probe wave. This can be seen
by observing that the intensity of the conjugate wave (wave 2) is proportional to the
product of the intensities of the pump waves 3 and 4 [see (22.3-32)]. When the powers
of the pump waves are increased so that the conjugate wave (wave 2) carries more
power than the probe wave (wave 1), the medium acts as an “amplifying mirror.”
An example of an optical arrangement that provides phase conjugation is shown in
Fig. 22.3-8.

Degenerate Four-Wave Mixing as a Form of Real-Time Holography

The degenerate four-wave-mixing process is analogous to volume holography (see
Sec. 4.5). Holography is a two-step process in which the interference pattern formed by
the superposition of an object wave Ел and a reference wave Ез is recorded in а photo-
graphic emulsion. Another reference wave Ра is subsequently transmitted through or
reflected from the emulsion, creating the conjugate of the object wave Ey сх Е4ЕзЕТ,
or its replica Ey «x E,E,E3, depending on the geometry [see Fig 4.5-10(a) and
(b)]. The nonlinear medium permits a real-time simultaneous holographic recording
and reconstruction process. This process occurs in both the Kerr medium and the

1046 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
Pump
N
Crystal
Probe
—_> 1,
И ‹
vA Pump
Conjugate \ 4
er
Figure 22.3-8 An optical system for degenerate four-wave mixing using a nonlinear crystal. The
pump waves 3 and 4 and the probe wave 1 are obtained from a laser using a beamsplitter and two
mirrors. The conjugate wave 2 is created within the crystal.
photorefractive medium (see Sec. 21.4).

When four waves are mixed in a nonlinear medium, each pair of waves interferes
and creates a grating, from which a third wave is reflected to produce the fourth
wave. The roles of reference and object are exchanged among the four waves, so that
there are two types of gratings as illustrated in Fig. 22.3-9. Consider first the process
illustrated in Fig. 22.3-9(a) [see also Fig. 4.5-10(a)]. Assume that the two reference
waves (denoted as waves 3 and 4) are counterpropagating plane waves. The two steps
of holography are:

1. The object wave 1 is added to the reference wave 3 and the intensity of their sum

is recorded in the medium in the form of a volume grating (hologram).

2. The reconstruction reference wave 4 is Bragg reflected from the grating to create

the conjugate wave (wave 2).
This grating is called the transmission grating.
Wave 3 ——— Wave 4 Wave 3 \ \ WY wave 4
(reference) —— (reference) (reference) \\\\\ || ceference)
VE и“ —_ owe aw) \\ \\
or ee о | owe „327 <> VAAL
ее gO) MA WED
со RO)
“ (a) ()
Figure 22.3-9 Four-wave mixing in a nonlinear medium. A reference and object wave interfere
and create a grating from which the second reference wave reflects and produces a conjugate wave.
There are two possibilities corresponding to (a) transmission and (6) reflection gratings.

The second possibility, illustrated in Fig. 22.3-9(b), is for the reference wave 4 to
interfere with the object wave | and create a grating, called the reflection grating, from
which the second reference wave 3 is reflected to create the conjugate wave 2. These
two gratings can exist together but they usually have different efficiencies.

In summary, four-wave mixing can provide a means for real-time holography and
phase conjugation, which have a number of applications in optical signal processing.
Use of Phase Conjugators in Wave Restoration
The ability to reflect a wave onto itself so that it retraces its path in the opposite
direction suggests a number of useful applications, including the removal of wavefront

22.4 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1047
aberrations. The idea is based on the principle of reciprocity, illustrated in Fig. 22.3-10.
Rays traveling through a linear optical medium from left to right follow the same path
if they reverse and travel back in the opposite direction. The same principle applies to
waves.
—^ —=<---------- a coe ---= =,
— > ~€---------- a ~ ceed ===.
— alate eee ----`
Figure 22.3-10 Optical reciprocity.

If the wavefront of an optical beam is distorted by an aberrating medium, the original
wave can be restored by use of a conjugator that reflects the beam onto itself and
transmits it once more through the same medium, as illustrated in Fig. 22.3-11.

One important application is in optical resonators (see Chapter 11). If the resonator
contains an aberrating medium, replacing one of the mirrors with a conjugate mirror
ensures that the distortion is removed in each round trip, so that the resonator modes
have undistorted wavefronts transmitted through the ordinary mirror, as illustrated in
Fig. 22.3-12.

Г
P P . i Distorting Phase conjugate
Figure 22.3-11 A phase conjugate mirror Figure 22.3-12 An optical resonator with
reflects a distorted wave onto itself, so that when ап ordinary mirror and a phase conjugate mir-
it retraces its path, the distortion is compensated. — гог.
*22.4 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES

A quantitative analysis of the process of three-wave mixing in a second-order non-
linear optical medium is provided in this section using a coupled-wave theory. Unlike
the treatment provided in Sec. 22.2, all three waves are treated on equal footing. To
simplify the analysis, consideration of anisotropic and dispersive effects is deferred to
Secs. 22.6 and 22.7, respectively.
Coupled-Wave Equations
In accordance with (22.1-6) and (22.1-7), wave propagation in a second-order non-
linear medium is governed by the basic wave equation

1 OPE

УЕ =-S 22.4-1
2 OP ( )

1048 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
where 2p
NL
8 = Ho aa (22.4-2)
is regarded as a radiation source, and
Pri = 248? (22.4-3)
is the nonlinear component of the polarization density.

In three-wave mixing, the field €(t) is taken as a superposition of three waves of
angular frequencies сл, w2, and w3 with complex amplitudes EF, Е>, and £3:

E(t)= »` Re{H,exp(juyt)} = S $ [By exp(jwat) + Ef exp(—juyt)|

q=1,2,3 q=1,2,3
(22.4-4)
[compare with (22.2-12) in the context of the first Born approximation]. It is convenient
to rewrite (22.4-4) in the compact form
&( = S > SE, exp(juyt), (22.4-5)
q= +1,42,+3
where w_, = —w, and E_, = Ех. The corresponding polarization density obtained
by substituting (22.4-5) into (22.4-3) is a sum of 6 x 6 = 36 terms,
Pui(t)=2d-4 So BB, exp [а +wr)t]. (22.4-6)
ат =+1,+2,+3
Thus, the corresponding radiation source is
S= hod SY) (wy +)? Е.Е, exp [аа + w,)E], (22.4-7)
q@r=+1,+2,43
which generates a sum of harmonic components whose frequencies are sums and
differences of the original frequencies ил, we, and ws.

Substituting (22.4-5) and (22.4-7) into the wave equation (22.4-1) leads to a single
differential equation with many terms, each of which is a harmonic function of some
frequency. If the frequencies ил, w2, and ws are distinct, we can separate this equation
into three time-independent differential equations by equating terms on both sides of
(22.4-1) at each of the frequencies ил, w2, and из, separately. The result is cast in the
form of three Helmholtz equations with associated sources,

(У? + Е?) Е! = 51 (22.4-8a)

(У? + k3) By = —55 (22.4-8b)

(У? + k3) Ез = — 53, (22.4-8c)
where S, is the complex amplitude of the component of $ with frequency wy and
Ка = пол /Со, 4 = 1, 2,3. Each of the complex amplitudes of the three waves satisfies
the Helmholtz equation with a source equal to the component of $ at its frequency.
Under certain conditions, the source for one wave depends on the electric fields of the
other two waves, so that the three waves are coupled.

22.4 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1049

In the absence of nonlinearity, d = 0 whereupon the source term $ vanishes and
each of the three waves satisfies the Helmholtz equation independently of the other
two, as expected in linear optics.

If the frequencies ил, wo, and из are not commensurate (one frequency is not the
sum or difference of the other two, and one frequency is not twice another), then the
source term $ does not contain any components of frequencies ил, we, ог из. The
components 51, 52, and $3 then vanish and the three waves do not interact.

For the three waves to be coupled by the medium, their frequencies must be com-
mensurate. Assume, for example, that one frequency is the sum of the other two,

ил + 2 = из. (22.4-9)
The source $ then contains components at the frequencies ил, w2, and из. Examining
the 36 terms of (22.4-7) yields
51 = 2иовл а E3E3 (22.4-10)
52 = 2u wd Ез Е (22.4-11)
53 = 2u,w3d Е1Е>. (22.4-12)
The source for wave | is proportional to ЕзЕ5 (since ил = w3 — we), so that waves 2
and 3 together contribute to the growth of wave 1. Similarly, the source for wave 3 is
proportional to FE (since из = ил + w2), so that waves 1 and 2 combine to amplify
wave 3, and so on. The three waves are thus coupled or “mixed” by the medium in a
process described by three coupled differential equations in FE), Е, and Es,
(V? +k?) EB, = —2p1,.w?d E3E% (22.4-13a)
(V? + 2) Е> = —2p1,wed ЕзЕ* (22.4-13b)
(V? + 2) Ез = —2pwid Ey Ep. (22.4-13с)
3-Wave-Mixing
Coupled Equations
ee
EXERCISE 22.4-1
SHG as Degenerate Three-Wave Mixing. Equations (22.4-13) are valid only when the fre-
quencies ил, W2, and ws are distinct. Consider now the degenerate case for which ил = we = w and
из = 2w, so that there are two instead of three waves, with amplitudes Ё\ and Ез. This corresponds
to second-harmonic generation (SHG). Show that these waves satisfy the Helmholtz equation with
sources
51 = Зима E3E% (22.4-14)
53 = Иоза Ey Fy, (22.4-15)
so that the coupled wave equations are
(V? +k?) E, = —2y wid ЕзЕ*, (22.4-16a)
(У? +k3)E3 = —p wed В Ey. (22.4-16b)
SHG Coupled Equations
Note that these equations are not obtained from the three-wave-mixing equations (22.4-13) by sub-
stituting ЕЁ! = E» [the factor of 2 is absent in (22.4-16b)].
ae

1050 = CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS

Mixing of Three Collinear Uniform Plane Waves

Assume that the three waves are plane waves traveling in the z direction with complex
amplitudes Е. = A,exp(—jk,z), complex envelopes A,, and wavenumbers ky =
w,/c, 4 = 1,2, 3. It is convenient to normalize the complex envelopes by defining the
variables a, = A,/(2nfiw,)'/*, where 1 = 1,/n is the impedance of the medium,
No = (Mo/€o)'/? is the impedance of free space, and /iw, is the energy of a photon of
angular frequency wy. Thus,

Eg = у 2 dg exp(—jkgz), q=1,2,8, (22.4-17)
and the intensities of the three waves are I, = |E,|?/2n = hw,|a,q|?. The photon-flux
densities (photons/s-m7) associated with these waves are

_ М _ 2
Фа = fun, = |a,|°. (22.4-18)
The variable a, therefore represents the complex envelope of wave а, scaled such that
|a,|? is the photon-flux density. This scaling is convenient since the process of wave
mixing must be governed by photon-number conservation (see Sec. 22.2C).

As a result of the interaction between the three waves, the complex envelopes a,
vary with z so that a, = a,(z). If the interaction is weak, the a,(z) vary slowly
with z, so that they can be assumed approximately constant within a distance of a
wavelength. This makes it possible to use the slowly varying envelope approximation
wherein d*a,/dz? is neglected relative to k,da,/dz = (27/2,q)daq/dz and

2 2 . . Ча .
(М + А, [ачехр(—7К42)] = 2 - exp(—jkqz) (22.4-19)
(see Sec. 2.2C). With this approximation (22.4-13) reduce to simpler equations that are
akin to the paraxial Helmholtz equations, in which the mismatch in phase is considered:
day . « .
Te IGA exp(—jAk z) (22.4-20a)
da
=z = —jga3a% exp(—jAk =) (22.4-20b)
z
da
—3 = —jga1 a2 exp(jAk =) (22.4-20c)
dz 3-Wave-Mixing
Coupled Equations
where
g? = hur wowsr?d? (22.4-21)
and
Ak = kg — kg — ky (22.4-22)
represents the error in the phase-matching condition. The variations of а1, аз, and аз
with z are therefore governed by three coupled first-order differential equations (22.4-
20), which we proceed to solve under the different boundary conditions corresponding
to various applications. It is useful, however, first to derive some invariants of the

22.4 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1051
wave-mixing process. These are functions of а1, dz, and аз that are independent of
z. Invariants are useful since they can be used to reduce the number of independent
variables. Exercises 22.4-3 and 22.4-2 develop invariants based on conservation of
energy and conservation of photons.
ee
EXERCISE 22.4-2
Photon-Number Conservation: The Manley—Rowe Relations. — Using (22.4-20), show that

d 2 4 2 4 2
from which the Manley—Rowe relations (22.2-19), derived using photon-number conservation, fol-
low. Equation (22.4-23) implies that |a,|? + |a3|? and |а>|? + |a3|? are also invariants of the wave-
mixing process.
EXERCISE 22.4-3
Energy Conservation. Show that the sum of the intensities [, = hw,|a,q|?, ¢ = 1,2, 3, of the
three waves governed by (22.4-20) is invariant to z, so that
d
qth t+ tI) =0. (22.4-24)
И
А. Second-Harmonic Generation (SHG)
Second-harmonic generation (SHG) is a degenerate case of three-wave mixing in
which
Wy = Wo =W and шз = 2w. (22.4-25)
Two forms of interaction occur: in SHG, two photons of frequency w combine to form a
single photon of frequency 2w, as illustrated in Fig. 22.4-1(a); in degenerate parametric
downconversion, one photon of frequency 2w splits into two photons of frequency w.
The interaction of the two waves is described by the paraxial Helmholtz equations
with sources. Conservation of momentum requires that
2k, = kz. (22.4-26)
ee
EXERCISE 22.4-4
Coupled-Wave Equations for SHG. Apply the slowly varying envelope approximation (22.4-
19) to the Helmholtz equations (22.4-16), which describe two collinear waves in the degenerate case,
to show that
d
= = —jga3a% exp(—jAkz) (22.4-27a)
daz .9 .
— = —j=a,q, exp(jAkz), (22.4-27b)
dz 2
where Ak = Кз — 2k, and
9 = Ат. (22.4-28)
ee

1052 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
Assuming two collinear waves with perfect phase matching (Ak = 0), equations (22.4-
27) reduce to
d
— = —jga3a°% (22.4-29a)
d
= = —j Faia. (22.4-29b)
2 SHG Coupled Equations
At the input to the device (z = 0) the amplitude of the second-harmonic wave is
assumed to be zero, аз(0) = 0, and that of the fundamental wave, a; (0), is assumed to
be real. We seek a solution for which a;(z) is real everywhere. Using the energy con-
servation relation a?(z) + 2|a3(z)|? = a7(0), (22.4-29b) gives a differential equation
in a3(z),
das/dz = —j(9/2){a;(0) — 2|as(z)|"], (22.4-30)
whose solution may be substituted in (22.4-29a) to obtain the overall solution:
а1(2) = а1 (0) sech (5 9a (0)2) (22.4-3 1a)
a3(z) = -4 ал (0) tanh (J5gai(0)z) . (22.4-31b)
Consequently, the photon-flux densities ф1 (2) = |а1 (2)? and $з(=) = |a3(z)|? evolve
in accordance with
o1(z) = $1 (0) sech? (>) (22.4-32a)
1 2(
$3(z) = 4¢1(0) tanh (77), (22.4-32b)
where y/2 = ga;(0)/V2, 1.е.,

22 = 29?а? (0) = 297¢1(0) = За? hw? (0) = 8d??w7 1, (0). (22.4-33)
Since sech*(-) + tanh?(-) = 1, ¢1(z) + 2¢3(z) = ¢1(0) is constant, indicating that at
each position =, photons of wave 1 are converted to half as many photons of wave 3.
The fall of ф1 (=) and the rise of @3(z) with z are shown in Fig. 22.4-1(5).

Note that there would be no inception of the interaction characterized by (22.4-29)
under the initial conditions а1(0) = 0 and аз(0) > 0, so that the inverse process of
spontaneous parametric downconversion (see Fig. 22.2-8) is not permitted within the
confines of these classical equations.

Efficiency of SHG
The efficiency of second-harmonic generation for an interaction region of length L is
I3(Z) _ hw33(L) _ 2¢3(L) 2 (=)

“uc 710)  №лф 0) 610) 2
For large yL (long cell, large input intensity, or large nonlinear parameter), the ef-
ficiency approaches one. This signifies that all the input power (at frequency w) has
been transformed into power at frequency 2%; all input photons of frequency w are
converted into half as many photons of frequency 2w.

22.4 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1053
Fundamental
a $1(9+2$3 (©)
0 =
60) ho
$12) Uy. Пи
— 1410) ee д”
271
ЦА $з(®) hw
harmonic % 5 4 NZ
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 22.4-1 Second-harmonic generation. (a) A wave of frequency w incident on a nonlinear
crystal generates a wave of frequency 2w. (b) As the photon-flux density ¢,(z) of the fundamental
wave decreases, the photon-flux density $3(z) of the second-harmonic wave increases. Since photon
numbers are conserved, the sum ф1 (2) + 2@3(z) = ф1 (0) is a constant. (с) Two photons of frequency
w combine to make one photon of frequency 2w.

For small Г, [small device length L, small nonlinear parameter d, or small input
photon-flux density ¢1(0)], the argument of the tanh function is small and therefore the
approximation tanh т = x may be used. The efficiency of second-harmonic generation
is then

зна = 1 (0) 47 — 29 $1 (0) = Ш $1(0) = yw 1(0),
(22.4-35)
so that
Г? 4?
Пана = СР, С = 2, (22.4-36)
п SHG Efficiency
where Р = I,(0)A is the incident optical power at the fundamental frequency and A
is the cross-sectional area. This reproduces (22.2-6) and shows that the constant С?
is proportional to the material parameter d?/n?, which is a figure of merit used for
comparing different nonlinear materials.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 22.4-1. Efficiency of SHG. For а material with d?/n? = 10-46 C/V? (see
Table 22.6-3 for typical values of а) and a fundamental wave of wavelength 1 ит, С? = 38 x 10-9
W~! = 0.038 (MW). In this case, the SHG efficiency is 10% if PL? /A = 2.63 MW. If the aspect
ratio of the interaction volume is 1000, 1.е., L?/A = 10°, the required power is 2.63 W. This may
be realized using Г, = 1 cm and A = 100 ppm”, corresponding to a power density P/A = 2.63 x 10°
W/cm?. The SHG efficiency may be improved by using higher power density, longer interaction
length, or material with a larger value of d?/n°.
«ПИ
Phase Mismatch т SHG
To study the effect of phase (or momentum) mismatch, the general equations (22.4-27)
are used with Ak ¥ 0. For simplicity, we limit ourselves to the weak-coupling case
for which yL < 1. In this case, the amplitude of the fundamental wave a;(z) varies
only slightly with z [see Fig. 22.4-1(a)], and may be assumed approximately constant.

1054 — CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
Substituting а1(2) = а1(0) in (22.4-27b), and integrating, we obtain
9 ы 9
аз(Р) = 75а! (0) ] ехр( Akz) dz = — (555) a}(0)[exp(GAkL) — 1]
0
(22.4-37)
from which $3(L) = |a3(L)|? = (g/Ak)?¢2(0) sin?(AkL/2), where а1(0) is as-
sumed to be real. The efficiency of second-harmonic generation is therefore
I3(L) _ 2¢3(L) _ эр. 2
= = = CO Pine (AKL /27), 22.4-38
suc 7. (0) $1 (0) A sinc” ( / 27) ( )
where зтс(1) = зт(лх)/(пх).

The effect of phase mismatch is therefore to reduce the efficiency of second-
harmonic generation by the factor sinc?(AkL/27). This confirms the previous results
displayed in Fig. 22.2-14. For a given mismatch Ak, the process of SHG is efficient
for lengths smaller than the coherence length DL, = 2” /|АК(.

B. Optical Frequency Conversion (OFC)

A frequency up-converter [Fig. 22.4-2(a)] converts a wave of frequency w into a wave
of higher frequency w3 by use of an auxiliary wave at frequency we, called the pump.
A photon hw. from the pump is added to a photon hw, from the signal to form a photon
hws of the up-converted signal at an up-converted frequency w3 = ил + Wy.

The conversion process is governed by the three coupled equations (22.4-20). For
simplicity, assume that the three waves are phase matched (Ak = 0) and that the
pump is sufficiently strong so that its amplitude does not change appreciably within
the interaction distance of interest; 1.е., а2(2) = a2(0) for all z between 0 and L. The
three equations (22.4-20) then reduce to two,

day Y
— ——j+¢. 22.4-39
de Jz ( a)
das Y
— =-jr 22.4-39b
dz J 2 ат, ( )
where 7 = 2ga(0) and а>(0) is assumed real. These are simple differential equations
with harmonic solutions
ai(z) = а (0) ссз(77) (22.4-40a)
. . (78
a3(z) = — даа (0) sin() . (22.4-40b)
The corresponding photon-flux densities are
o1(z) = $1 (0) cos? (>) (22.4-41a)
2 [72
$з(=) = $1(0) sin (>) ; (22.4-41b)

22.4 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1055
The dependencies of the photon-flux densities ¢, and ¢3 оп z are sketched in
Fig. 22.4-2(b). Photons are exchanged periodically between the two waves. In the
region between z = 0 and z = 7/7, the input ал photons combine with the pump
Ww, photons and generate the up-converted w3 photons. Wave 1 is therefore attenuated,
whereas wave 3 is amplified. In the region z = 1/7 to д = 27/77, the w3 photons are
more abundant; they disintegrate into ил and we. photons, so that wave 3 is attenuated
and wave 1 amplified. The process is repeated periodically as the waves travel through
the medium.
Signal
“hy (ODA Upconverted “ang fiw
Upconverted I “gna 3(2) 007 Nr
1 м
signal / \ у \ fiw
Pump Signal Ри
Bic) а
0
2 ом
0 п п 30 75 fiw
(a) (Ь) (с)
Figure 22.4-2 The frequency up-converter; (а) wave mixing; (5) evolution of the photon-flux
densities of the input w1-wave and the up-converted ws-wave. The pump w2-wave is assumed
constant; (c) photon interactions.
The efficiency of up-conversion for a device of length L is
= —~ = —sin*| — |. 22.4-42
For yL < 1, and using (22.4-21), this is approximated by I3(L)/I)(0) = (w3/w1)
(yL/2)? = (w3/w1)g?L7b2(0) = 2w3 L?.d?n3I(0) from which
Г? 4?
Nore = СР» C? = wim, (22.4-43)
n OFC Efficiency
where A is the cross-sectional area and P: = 15(0)А is the pump power. This expres-
sion is similar to (22.4-36) for the efficiency of second-harmonic generation.
[ШЕЕ ии
EXERCISE 22.4-5
Infrared Up-Conversion. An up-converter uses a proustite crystal (а = 1.5 x 10-22 C/V?,
n = 2.6, d?/n? = 1.3 x 10-45 C?/V*). The input wave is obtained from a CO, laser of wavelength
Ло = 10.6 ит, and the pump from a 1-W Ма3+:УАС laser of wavelength Л, = 1.06 ит focused
to a cross-sectional area 10-2 mm? (see Fig. 22.2-6). Determine the wavelength of the up-converted
wave and the efficiency of up-conversion if the waves are collinear and the interaction length is 1 cm.
НИ

1056 — CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
C. Optical Parametric Amplification (OPA) and Oscillation (OPO)
Optical Parametric Amplifier (OPA)
The OPA uses three-wave mixing in a nonlinear crystal to provide optical gain
[Fig. 22.4-3(a)]. The process is governed by the same three coupled equations (22.4-
20) with the waves identified as follows. Wave 1 is the signal to be amplified; it is
incident on the crystal with a small intensity Г, (0). Wave 3, the pump, is an intense
wave that provides power to the amplifier. Wave 2, called the idler, is an auxiliary
wave created by the interaction process.
Signal
UV Signal
\/ \ ignal/¢,(z) ho
Idler hw
My nas
0 /
Pump o( ) Idler // 959 а,
Мы 0 ae
0 1 2 Az
Figure 22.4-3 The optical parametric amplifier: (a) wave mixing; (b) photon-flux densities of the
signal and the idler (the pump photon-flux density is assumed constant); (c) photon mixing.
Assuming perfect phase matching (Ak = 0), and an undepleted pump, a3(z) =
a3(0), the coupled-wave equations (22.4-20) provide
da, -Y x
En 1595 (22.4-44а)
day Y
— =-j-a;} 22.4-44b
where 7y = 2ga3(0). If аз(0) is real, y is also real, and the differential equations have
the solution
ат (=) = a;(0) cosh (7) — jai(0) sinh (=) (22.4-45a)
a(z) = —ja*(0) sinh(>) + a2(0) cosh (7) , (22.4-45b)
If а2(0) = 0, 1.е., the initial idler field is zero, then the corresponding photon-flux
densities are
2 (V4
61(2) = 61(0) cosh? (12) (22.4-46a)
$12 [72
62(=) = $1 (0) sinh (>) (22.4-46b)

22.4 SECOND-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1057
Both ф1(2) and ¢2(z) grow monotonically with z, as illustrated in Fig. 22.4-3(b). This
growth saturates when sufficient energy is drawn from the pump so that the assumption
of an undepleted pump no longer holds.

The overall gain of an amplifier of length L is G = ¢,(L)/¢1(0) = cosh?(yL/2).
In the limit yL >> 1,G = (e74/? + e-74/?)?/4 == e7/4, so that the gain increases
exponentially with 7L. The gain coefficient y = 2ga3(0) = 2d\/2hw w2w37? a3(0),
from which

а?
y = 2CV/13(0) = 2C\/P3/A, С? = 2—5, (22.4-47)
п OPA Gain Coefficient
where Рз = I3(0)A is the pump power and А is the cross-sectional area, and С? is a
parameter similar to that describing SHG and OFC.

The interaction is tantamount to a pump photon hws splitting into a photon hw, that
amplifies the signal, and a photon ftw that creates the idler [Fig. 22.4-3(c)].
ee
EXERCISE 22.4-6
Gain of an OPA. An OPA amplifies light at Л, = 2.5 ит by using a 2-cm long KTP crystal
pumped by a Nd:YAG laser with A, = 1.064 um. Determine the wavelength of the idler wave and
the C coefficient in (22.4-47). Determine the appropriate laser power and beam cross-sectional area
such that the total amplifier gain is 3 dB. Assume that n = 1.75 and а = 2.3 x 10-23 C/V? for KTP.
НИ
Optical Parametric Oscillator (OPO)

A parametric oscillator is constructed by providing feedback at either or both the signal
and the idler frequencies of a parametric amplifier, as illustrated in Fig. 22.4-4. In the
former case, the oscillator is called a singly resonant oscillator (SRO); in the latter, it
is called a doubly resonant oscillator (DRO).

Signal w, Signal w,

Idler >> Idler >
Pump 3 ——> Ритр W3 ——
(a) SRO (b) DRO

Figure 22.4-4 The parametric oscillator generates light at frequencies ил and wa. A pump of
frequency w3 = Ww, + We serves as the source of energy. (a) Singly resonant oscillator (SRO). (5)
Doubly resonant oscillator (DRO).

The oscillation frequencies ил and w2 of the parametric oscillator are determined
by the frequency- and phase-matching conditions, ил + w2 = w3 and плал + New =
n3W3, in the collinear case. The solution of these two equations yields ил and we,
as described in Sec. 22.2D. In addition, these frequencies must also coincide with the
resonance frequencies of the resonator modes, much the same as for conventional lasers
(see Sec. 16.1B). The system therefore tends to be over-constrained, particularly in the
DRO case for which both the signal and idler frequencies must coincide with resonator
modes.

1058 — CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
Another condition for oscillation is that the gain of the amplifier must exceed the
loss introduced by the mirrors for one round trip of propagation within the resonator.
By equating the gain and the loss, expressions for the threshold amplifier gain and the
corresponding threshold pump intensity may be determined, as shown below for the
SRO and DRO configurations.
SRO. At the threshold of oscillation, the signal’s amplified and doubly reflected
amplitude а: (Г) rz equals the initial amplitude a, (0), where Г, is the length of the
nonlinear medium and rj is the magnitude of the amplitude reflectance of a mirror (the
two mirrors are assumed identical and the phase associated with a round trip is not
included since it is a multiple of 27). Using (22.4-45a), together with the boundary
condition а>(0) = 0, we obtain т? cosh(yL/2) = 1, from which
a2 ql 1
Here, №1 = rj is the mirror power reflectance at the signal frequency. Since R; is
typically slightly smaller than unity, cosh?(yL/2) is slightly greater than unity, 1.е.,
yL/2 < 1 and the approximation cosh*(a) = 1 + x? may be used. It follows that at
threshold (yL/2)? = (1 — ®7)/R}. Using (22.4-47), we obtain the threshold intensity,
from which the threshold power of the pump is obtained,
1 A 1-8}
P3|threshola (0) = eR Rp 1, (22.4-49)
1 SRO Threshold Pump Power
where С? = 2 лил 13а? /п? and A is the cross-sectional area. For example, if L?/A =
10°, С? = 10-7 W~!, and R; = 0.9, then P3|threshola(O) = 2.3 W.
DRO. At threshold, two conditions must be satisfied: а1(Г)т? = а1(0) and
a2(L) т2 = a2(0), where т1 and то are the magnitudes of the amplitude reflectances of
the mirrors at the signal and idler frequencies, respectively. Substituting for a;(Z) from
(22.4-45a), and substituting for a2(L) from (22.4-45b) and forming the conjugate, we
obtain L L
(1 — R, cosh ) a,(0) + (sx sinh >) а*(0) =0 (22.4-50а)
Г, Г
(- Жо sinh >.) а: (0) + (1 — Ry cosh ) а*(0) =0, (22.4-50b)
where Х1 = rT? and Ry = т2 are the power reflectances of the mirrors at the signal and
idler frequencies, respectively. Equating the values of the ratio а1 (0) /а5(0) obtained
from (22.4-50a) and (22.4-50b) then leads to
h{ — } = ————. 22.4-51
eos ( 2 ) Ry + Ry )
If yL/2 < 1, we can again use the approximation cosh? = 1+ 2? and write
(yL/2)? = (1 — RF) (1 — R3)/(Ri + Ro)”, from which we obtain the threshold pump

22.5 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1059
power:
ТА (1—R?)(1 — R32
Psltmreshoia(0) © Ge Fa Got) (22.4-52)
(Ri + Re) DRO Threshold Pump Power
The ratio of the threshold pump power for the DRO configuration, to that for the
SRO configuration, as calculated from (22.4-49) and (22.4-52), is then determined to
be 32 (1 — 22) /(Х: + Х2)?. Since Ry = Тапа Ry = 1, this is approximately equal
to (1 — R2)/2, which is small. Thus, the threshold power for the DRO is substantially
lower than that for the SRO. Unfortunately, DROs are more sensitive to fluctuations
of the resonator length because of the requirement that the oscillation frequencies of
both the signal and the idler match resonator modes. DROs therefore often have poor
stability and spiky spectra.
*22.5 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES
A. Four-Wave Mixing (FWM)
We now derive the coupled differential equations that describe FWM in a third-order
nonlinear medium, using an approach similar to that employed in the three-wave mix-
ing case in Sec. 22.4.
Coupled-Wave Equations
Consider four waves constituting a total field
E(t)= So Re[E,exp(jugt)]= S > ТЕ exp(jugt) (22.5-1)
q=1,2,3,4 q=+1,+2,43,+4
traveling in a medium characterized by a nonlinear polarization density
Py = 4y 83. (22.5-2)
The corresponding source of radiation, $ = —1,0?Py,/0t?, is therefore a sum of
8° = 512 terms,
$=1х® So (wy twp + wr)? By Е, exp|j (аа + wp +). (22.5-3)
арт==1,=2,+3,-4
Substituting (22.5-1) and (22.5-3) into the wave equation (22.4-1), and equating terms
at each of the four frequencies ил, wa, w3, and wy, leads to four Helmholtz equations
with their associated sources,
(V? +2) Ey = —54, а= 1,2, 3, 4, (22.5-4)
where S, is the complex amplitude of the component of $ at frequency wy.

1060 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS

For the four waves to be coupled, their frequencies must be commensurate. Con-
sider, for example, the case for which the sum of two frequencies equals the sum of the
other two frequencies,

Wy tw. = из + wy, (22.5-5)
and assume that these frequencies are distinct. Three waves can then combine and
create a source at the fourth frequency. Using (22.5-5), terms in (22.5-3) at each of the
four frequencies are

51 = pow x {6 Ез Е4 B3 + ЗЕ [| Ey? + 265? + 2 Ез? + 2|Е4?]}  (22.5-ба)
55 = роз х 9) {6 ЕзЕ4 Ел + ЗЕ>[| 65]? + 2] 81? + 2| 63]? +284}  (22.5-6b)
53 = роз х 9) {6 61 By Et + ЗЕ3[| Е]? + 2] 65]? +281? +284}  (22.5-6с)
Sy = powtx {6 1 By B3 + ЗЕ4 |4? + 261? +2 Е? +2] Ез?]}. (22.5-6а)
Each wave is therefore driven by a source with two components. The first component
is a result of mixing of the other three waves. The first term in S,, for example, is
proportional to £345 and therefore represents the mixing of waves 2, 3, and 4 to
create a source for wave 1. The second component is proportional to the complex
amplitude of the wave itself. The second term of 51, for example, is proportional to
Ел, so that it plays the role of refractive-index modulation, and therefore represents the
optical Kerr effect (Exercise 22.3-3).
It is therefore convenient to separate the two contributions to these sources by
defining
Sq = Sq + (ч/с)? Ах. Е, а= 1,2, 3,4 (22.5-7)
where
51 = 6 wy?) Ез Е Е (22.5-8а)
52 = био х В) B3 Ey E* (22.5-8b)
5з = 6 wx) Ey BoE} (22.5-8c)
54 = био x) Ey Eo EX, (22.5-8d)
and n
Ах. = 6—y') (21 — 1), q = 1,2,3,4. (22.5-9)
бо
Here I, = |E,|*/2n are the intensities of the waves, Г = I, + Iz + 13 + [4 is the total
intensity, which is constant in view of conservation of energy, and 77 is the impedance
of the medium. This enables us to rewrite the Helmholtz equations (22.5-4) as
(ЕЕ =-5, 9=1,2,3,4, (22.5-10)
where
Fig = Tig! , (22.5-11)
Co
па =n? + 2172(21 — 14), (22.5-12)

22.5 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1061
and
3
ny = 2), (22.5-13)
Eon
which matches (22.3-6). If the second term of (22.5-12) is much smaller than the first,
then
Ng ® п + п2(21- 1). (22.5-14)
Optical Kerr Effect
The Helmholtz equation for each wave is therefore modified in two ways:

1. A source representing the combined effects of the other three waves is present.
This may lead to the amplification of an existing wave, or the generation of a
new wave at that frequency.

2. The refractive index for each wave is altered, becoming a function of the inten-
sities of the four waves.

These equations are used to generate four coupled nonlinear differential equations that
may be solved for the fields, or their complex envelopes, under the appropriate bound-
ary conditions. This was the approach followed for second-order nonlinear processes,
and will now be applied to several special cases in third-order nonlinear processes.
B. Three-Wave Mixing and Third-Harmonic Generation (THG)
We now consider degenerate cases for which two or three of the four waves have the
same frequency.
Three-Wave Mixing
In the degenerate case for which two of the four waves have the same frequency w3 =
W4 = wo, we have three waves with frequencies related by ил + wa = 20. A coupled-
wave theory of this three-wave mixing process can be formulated by identifying the
radiation sources generated at the three frequencies:
51 = pow x) {ЗЕ Е; + ЗЕ, [| Ei)? +265? +2] Во] } (22.5-15а)
55 = pws) {BERET + ЗВ [| Е? +2] В? +3 Е] } (22.5-15b)
So = ное х®) {6B Е Её + 3Ep [|Eo|? + 2|Ei|? +285]? }. — (22.5-15c)
When substituted in the Helmholtz equations (V? + k?)E, = —S,, 4 = 0,1,2, the
result is a set of coupled equations that can, in principle, be solved under appropriate
initial conditions.

Collinear waves traveling in the z direction are written E,(r) = A, exp(—jkgz).
As with second-order nonlinear processes, we use the slowly varying envelope ap-
proximation, (V? + ^2)[Ачехр(—/42)] = —j2kq(dAq/dz) exp(—jkqz), and write
the complex amplitudes A, = ,/2nhw, ад, in terms of the variables ад, which are
normalized such that ¢, = |a,|? are photon-flux densities. The analysis is simplified
by assuming that w, А wa wo when calculating the coupling coefficients. The result
is the following set of coupled equations:

da . * .
7 = —jg [аа exp(—jAk 2) + ay (lai|? + 2)a2|? + 2fao|?)]  (22.5-16а)

1062 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS

da . * .

7 = —jg [apa} exp(—jAk 2) + ag (|а2|? + 2|а1|? + 2fao|?)]  (22.5-16)

da . x .

z = —jg [2a; азаб exp(jAk 2) + ao (|ao|? + 2)ai|? + 2|az|?)] , (22.5-16c)
where
and

Ak = 2ko — ki — ka (22.5-18)

represents the phase-matching error.

This set of nonlinear equations can be readily solved in the undepleted pump ap-
proximation (|а1|, |а2| < |ao|) since in this case ag(z) is approximately constant. In
the phase matched case (Ak = 0), (22.5-16) are approximated by two linear differen-
tial equations

d
С (ай + 2a) (22.5-19a)
dz
day . *
—— = —Jjy(aj + 2a2), (22.5-19b)
dz
where 7y = ga? is a constant proportional to the constant pump intensity. The solution
to these equations is written in terms of the initial values of the two waves:
ai(z) = [(1 — уз) аз(0) — jy2a3(0)] exp(—J72) (22.5-20а)
а2(2) = [- 72а (0) + (1 — 772) а2(0)] exp(—jyz). (22.5-20b)
If the initial idler amplitude is а2(0) = 0, then the photon-flux density ¢1(z) =
|ai(z)|? of the signal grows as ф1(2) = (1 + 7222) 61 (0). The rate of growth is
sensitive to the magnitude and phase of the initial idler wave. For example, if а>(0) =
те? ал (0), then
oi(z) = [1+ (2rsin y)yz + (1+ т? + 2rcosy)y*z"] фл (0), (22.5-21)
which is a function of the phase difference y that reaches its maximum value when
tany = 2/yz. At small z, maximum growth occurs when ф = 7/2. Clearly, the
amplifier is a phase-sensitive amplifier.

To examine the effect of pump depletion and phase mismatch, the full set of equa-
tions (22.5-16) must be solved. One step in this direction is taken by writing the
complex amplitudes a, = b, exp(j#,q) in terms of their magnitudes b, and phases фа.
Substituting into (22.5-16) and equating the real and imaginary parts of each equation
leads to the following set of nonlinear equations in real variables:
db
—+ = 96255 sing (22.5-22a)

dz

db

— = gb?b, sing (22.5-22b)

dz

db

os = — 9606155 siny (22.5-22c)
z

d

= = Ak + g[2b5 — bj —b3] + 9 [6061/55 6062/61 —4b1 by] cosy, (22.5-22d)

22.5 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1063
where р = Ak z+ 1 + Ye — 20. Two invariants can be easily identified. Consistent
with conservation of optical intensity, the sum 7 + b3 + b2 must be constant. Also,
consistent with conservation of photons, the difference bj — b3 must be constant (this is
a version of the Manley—Rowe relations). Other invariants involving the phase y may
also be identified’ and used to study the role of phase mismatch and initial amplitudes
and phase difference between the signal and idler. For example, it can be readily seen
from (22.5-22a) that the initial rate of growth of the signal occurs when sin y = 0, 1.е.,
when ф = 7/2.

Third-Harmonic Generation (THG)
Another degenerate special case of four-wave mixing is third-harmonic generation.
Here, three of the four waves have identical frequencies, ил = wg = wy = w, and
the fourth has the sum frequency w3 = ил + и + W4 = 3w . In effect, we have two
waves, 1 and 3, whose amplitudes are coupled by the third-order nonlinear medium. А
coupled-wave theory can be formulated using the approach followed in the four- and
three-wave mixing cases. This leads to two Helmholtz equations (V* + k2)E, = —54,
where
51 = powtx®) {3E3 Et Et + ЗЕ, ||Ei|? + 2|B3|?}} (22.5-23a)
S3 = pow3x { ЕЗ + 3B; [|E3)? + 2|Ei)?] } - (22.5-23b)
These equations may be used to derive coupled equations for F and E3, as was done
in previous cases.
ee
EXERCISE 22.5-1
THG in the Undepleted-Pump Approximation. Assume that the fundamental and third-
harmonic waves are plane waves traveling in the z direction with complex envelopes A,, а = 1,3.
Use the slowly varying envelope approximation to write coupled differential equations for A, and
Аз. Show that in the undepleted pump approximation [Аз < A, and А! (=) = A,(0)],
a = —jga’ exp(—jAkz), (22.5-24)
z
where А. = ,/2nhw, aq and Ak = 3k, — kz. Derive an expression for g.
ee
C. Optical Phase Conjugation (OPC)
We now develop and solve the coupled-wave equations in the fully degenerate case
for which all four waves have the same frequency ил = we = W3 = W4 = &. AS
was assumed in Sec. 22.3E, two of the waves (waves 3 and 4), called the pump waves,
are plane waves propagating in opposite directions, with complex amplitudes Ез(г) =
A3 exp(—jk3-r) and Е4(г) = Ag exp(—jk4-r) and wavevectors related by k, = —Кз.
Their intensities are assumed to be much greater than those of waves 1 and 2, so that
they are approximately undepleted by the interaction process, allowing us to assume
that their complex envelopes Аз and Ад are constant. The total intensity of the four
waves / is then also approximately constant, I = [|A3|?+|A4|?]/2n. The terms 27 — I,
and 21 — Iz, which govern the effective refractive index m for waves 1 and 2 in (22.5-
14), are approximately equal to 2/, and are therefore also constant, so that the optical
Kerr effect amounts to a constant change of the refractive index. Its effect will therefore
be ignored.
1 See, e.g., G. Cappellini and $. Trillo, Third-Order Three-Wave Mixing in Single-Mode Fibers: Exact
Solutions and Spatial Instability Effects, Journal of the Optical Society of America В, vol. 8, pp. 824-838, 1991.

1064 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
With these assumptions the problem is reduced to a problem of two coupled waves,
1 and 2. Equations (22.5-10) and (22.5-8) give
(У? +k?) Е, = -Е Е (22.5-25а)
(V? + Е?) Е. = —€E%, (22.5-25b)
where
& = био? Vy) Ез Ел = био? х 3) АзА4 (22.5-26)
and К = По / со, where 7% = n + 2ng/ is a constant.

The four nonlinear coupled differential equations have thus been reduced to two
linear coupled equations, each of which takes the form of the Helmholtz equation with
a source term. The source for wave 1 is proportional to the conjugate of the complex
amplitude of wave 2, and similarly for wave 2.

Phase Conjugation
Assume that waves | and 2 are also plane waves propagating in opposite directions
along the z axis, as illustrated in Fig. 22.5-1,
E, = A, exp(—jkz), Ey = Agexp(jkz). (22.5-27)
This assumption is consistent with the phase-matching condition since ky + kg =
ka + Ка.
ss 3
1 Probe
—>
<2
Conjugate
< р Figure 22.5-1 Degenerate four-wave mix-
4 es ing. Waves 3 and 4 are intense pump waves
‘A, traveling in opposite directions. Wave 1, the
A! AiG) rT probe wave, and wave 2, the conjugate wave,
a7 TT 4 also travel in opposite directions and have
А! Ae) increasing amplitudes.
a ! р
-L 0 5

Substituting (22.5-27) in (22.5-25) and using the slowly varying envelope approx-
imation, (22.4-19), we reduce equations (22.5-25) to two first-order differential equa-
tions,

dA
tt = АХ (22.5-28a)
dz
dA
one _ УТ, (22.5-28b)
dz

22.5 THIRD-ORDER NONLINEAR OPTICS: COUPLED WAVES 1065
where
Е x)
y= — = Зо — AZ Ay (22.5-29)
2k n
is a coupling coefficient whose magnitude may be written in the form
2X @)
ly| = 2C / Bh, C= Зато = . . (22.5-30)
Coupling Coefficient
Here 13 = |A3|?/2n and [4 = |Aq|?/2n are the intensities of the two waves and
n= т/п.

For simplicity, assume that АзАл is real, so that y is real. The solution of (22.5-
28) is then two harmonic functions, А1(2) and A(z), with a 90° phase shift between
them. If the nonlinear medium extends over a distance between the planes z = —L
to z = 0, as illustrated in Fig. 22.5-1, wave 1 has amplitude A;(—L) = Aj, at the
entrance plane, and wave 2 has zero amplitude at the exit plane, 42(0) = 0. Under
these boundary conditions the solution of (22.5-28) is

Ay(2) = АР c0s(2) (22.5-31)
=) = —— cos(yz .5-
' cos yD 7
Ao(z) = j Ai in(yz) (22.5-32)
Zz) = j—— sin(yz). .5-
2 J cos yL 7
The amplitude of the reflected wave at the entrance plane, A, = Ag(—L), is
A, = —jA; tan(yL), (22.5-33)
Reflected Wave Amplitude
whereas the amplitude of the transmitted wave, A; = А1 (0), is
Aj
A, = ———.. (22.5-34)
cos(7L) Transmitted Wave Amplitude
Equations (22.5-33) and (22.5-34) suggest a number of applications:

= The reflected wave is a conjugated version of the incident wave. The device acts

as a phase conjugator (see Sec. 22.3E).

= The power reflectance, |A,|?/|A;|? = tan?(7L), may be smaller or greater than

1, corresponding to attenuation or gain, respectively. The medium can therefore
act as a reflection amplifier (an “amplifying mirror’).

= The transmittance | A;|?/|A;|? = 1/ cos?(7L) is always greater than 1, so that the

medium always acts as a transmission amplifier.

= When 7L = 7/2, or odd multiples thereof, the reflectance and transmittance are

infinite, indicating instability. The device may then be used as an oscillator.

1066 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
*22.6 ANISOTROPIC NONLINEAR MEDIA
In an anisotropic medium, each of the three components of the polarization-density
vector P = (P1, Фо, Ps) is generally a function of the three components of the electric-
field vector & = (€1,€2,€3). These functions are linear for small magnitudes of €
(see Sec. 6.3) but deviate slightly from linearity as € increases. They may therefore be
expanded in a Taylor series in terms of the three components of €, just as in the scalar
analysis presented in Sec. 22.1:
Pi = © У` Хи: +2 У` di jrEjEx + 4У` ХО ЕВЕ i,j,k,l = 1,2, 3.
2 jk jkl
(22.6-1)

The coefficients Ху, пк, and eu are tensor components that correspond to the
scalar coefficients x, d, and y), respectively, and (22.6-1) is a tensor generalization
of (22.1-2). Because the component d;,;;, of the (third-rank) second-order optical non-
linearity tensor is proportional to 0° P; /OE;OE,, it is invariant to exchange of j and К.
Similarly, the component Xu of the (fourth-rank) third-order optical nonlinearity
tensor is invariant to permutations of 7, К, and J. For lossless nondispersive media,
there are additional intrinsic symmetries: х;; = xj, аз Shown in Sec. 6.3A; also зу
and x; ‘лы аге invariant to permutations of their indices. This full-permutation symmetry
does not generally hold for dispersive nonlinear media.

Exploiting the symmetry condition d;;,_ = Чжу, components of the tensor dj;, are
usually listed as a 3 x 6 array dj, where the six independent combinations (j,k) =
11, 22, 33, 23, 31, 12 are represented by a single index J =1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, in that order
(see Table 21.2-1). For example, 425 denotes the coefficients 4231 = 4213.

The third-order coefficients хе are similarly described by a 6 x 6 array ye,
where the pair (7, 7) is contracted into a single index J = 1, 2,---,6, and the pair (К, [)
is contracted шо К = 1,2,---,6.

The structural symmetry of the crystal places additional constraints on the tensor
components d,;, and хо. When the coordinate system (1,2,3) coincides with the
principal axes of the giystal, which are determined from the tensor \;;, some entries in
the arrays d;7 and хук are zero, while others are equal or are related by some simple
rule. Representative examples are provided in Tables 22.6-1 and 22.6-2. Values for
the 4;; coefficients for a number of representative nonlinear crystals are provided in
Table 22.6-3. Though cubic crystals have isotropic linear optical properties, their well-
defined crystal axes (as determined by their structural symmetry) endow them with
anisotropic nonlinear optical properties.

Table 22.6-1 Second-order nonlinear coefficients 4; for some representative crystal groups.
fon i 0 a oan 0 a | 0 0 0 0 то

000 0 dy 0 000 0 dy 0 —422 doo 0 dis 0 0

000 0 оба. 000 0 O п 4х 431 Ча 943 0 0 0

Cubic 43m Tetragonal 42m Trigonal 3m
(e.g., GaAs, CdTe, InAs) (e.g., KDP, ADP) (e.g., BBO, LiNbO3, LiTaO3)

The tensors dj; and хо are closely related to the Pockels and Kerr tensors r;;, and
Sijkls Fespectively, as demonstrated in Prob. 22.6-2. They also have the same symmeg-
tries, as can be seen by comparing Tables 22.6-1 and 22.6-2, which list d;7 and Хтк,
with Tables 21.2-2 and 21.2-3, which provide rj; and s;x%, for a number of crystal
groups. Note, however, that 4; is analogous to the transpose of тгь.

22.6 ANISOTROPIC NONLINEAR MEDIA 1067
Table 22.6-2  Third-order nonlinear coefficients x for an isotropic medium.
X12 хи X12 0 0 0
Xb x xr 0 0 0 х® =1 (xf _ x?)
0 0 0 2) 0 0 ; 44 2 11 12
ооо о № 0
оо о о о x
Table 22.6-3 Representative magnitudes of second-order nonlinear optical
coefficients for selected materials.®
Crystal diz (C/V?) diz /со (pm/V)?
LiB,O; (LBO) ds; = 5.9 x 10-24 0.67
LilO; dz; = 3.9 x 10-23 44
LiNbO; doo = 1.9 x 10-23 2.1
а = 4.1 x 10-23 4.6
daz = 2.2 x 10-22 25.2
KNbO; dz; = 1.1 x 10-22 11.9
KTiOPO, (KTP) ds; = 2.0 x 10-23 2.2
4зз = 1.3 x 10-22 14.6
МН.Н.РО, (ADP) азв = 4.2 x 10-24 0.47
а-910> (quartz) di: = 2.7 x 10-24 0.30
KBe2BO3F2 (КВВЕ) di; = 4.3 x 10-24 0.49
GaAs dya = 1.5 x 10-21 170.
“Most of the coefficients are as reported by О. М. Nikogosyan, Nonlinear Optical Crystals:
A Complete Survey, Springer-Verlag, 2005. Values are provided at a wavelength Ло =
1.06 jm except for Te, which is provided at Ло = 10.6 um.
>The coefficients d /€o, specified in units of pm/V, are often used in practice. The nonlinear
optical coefficients in C/V? (MKS units) are readily converted to pm/V by dividing d by
107 e5 = 8.85 x 10774.
Three-Wave Mixing in Anisotropic Second-Order Nonlinear Media
When an optical field comprising two monochromatic linearly polarized waves of
angular frequencies ил and w2, and complex amplitudes E(w) and E(w2), travel
through a second-order nonlinear crystal, the induced nonlinear polarization-density
vector P(ws3) at frequency из = w; + «о has components
Раз) = 2S Ел) Ек (2), i, 9, = 12,3, (22.6-2)
jk
where Е’; (ил), Ex (we), and P;(w3) are the components of these vectors along the
principal axes of the crystal. This equation is a generalization of (22.2-13d).

1068 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
Using the contracted notation (7, К) = J, (22.6-2) may be conveniently written in
matrix form as:
Ey (чл) Fy (we)
Fg(w1) Fo(w
P\ (ws) 41 912 ``. dig г 1) Ba 2)
Px(w3) | =2] doi 42 --- doe 3 (41) Ез(42) .
P3(ws) аи ар ... dag | | P21) Es(w2) + Bs(w1) Bo (w2)
Ез(ил ) Ел (22) + EF) (w1) £3 (we)
E\(w1) Е (>) + Eo(w1) Ел (w2)
(22.6-3)
Effective value of 4. If Ej;(w,) = E(w) соз 01; and E,,(w2) = E(w) cos 9эь,
where 6); and 62, are the angles that the vectors Е (ил) and E(w.) make with the
principal axes, then (22.6-2) may be written in the form
jk
Since the polarization-density vector P(w3) is the source for wave 3, only the compo-
nent P| (w3) in the plane orthogonal to the wavevector k3 contributes; the component
parallel to k3 cannot radiate a TEM wave. ИР, (ws) makes angles 63; with the prin-
cipal axes, then its magnitude is
P,(w3) = У `` P;(ws) cos 05. (22.6-5)
i
It follows from (22.6-4) and (22.6-5) that
P.(w3) = 2ажЕ (1) E(w), (22.6-6)
where the effective second-order nonlinear optical coefficient is
der = У` Чик COS 05; COs 91; COs эк. (22.6-7)
igk
Equation (22.6-6) takes the same form as that used in the scalar formulation pro-
vided in Secs. 22.2C and 22.4; the effective second-order nonlinear coefficient deg
plays the role of the nonlinear-optics coefficient d. Example 22.6-1 illustrates the
computation of deg for a three-wave mixing configuration in an anisotropic crystal.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 22.6-1. Collinear Туре-! Three-Wave Mixing т а КОР Crystal. In this ех-
ample, we determine the effective nonlinear optical coefficient deg for three collinear waves traveling
in a КОР crystal at an arbitrary direction (6, Ф) defined in a spherical coordinate system with the
crystal optic axis pointing in the z direction, as illustrated in Fig. 22.6-1. Waves 1 and 2 are ordinary
waves at frequencies и and we, and wave 3 is extraordinary with frequency из = wy + Wo.
Using (22.6-2) and Table 22.6-1 for crystals of 42m symmetry, such as KDP, the nonlinear
components of the polarization-density vector are given by

22.7 DISPERSIVE NONLINEAR MEDIA 1069
In this geometry, the electric field components of waves 1 and 2 are:
Ел (41) = E(w) sing, Е (ил) = — E(w) cos ¢, E3(w1) =0,
FE, (42) = E(w2)sind, Ey(w2) = —E(w2)cosd, E3(w2) = 0. (22.6-9)
Therefore, based on (22.6-8), the components of the polarization-density vector for wave 3 are
Pi(w3) =0, Po(w3)=0, P3(w3) = —4d36 sin dcos @ E(w,) E(w). (22.6-10)
In this case, the component Р\ (из) = —P3(w3) sin 0, so that
deg = — 9з6 sin @ sin 2¢. (22.6-11)
This result can also be obtained by direct use of (22.6-7) with the appropriate angles and coefficients.
The effective nonlinear optical coefficient in (22.6-11) has its maximum magnitude dgg if the
angles are 9 = 90° and ф = 45°, as illustrated in Fig. 22.6-1.
< <
k
27
90 @
L. Figure 22.6-1 (a) Geometry for
collinear Type-I о-о-е three-wave
7 | mixing in a uniaxial crystal whose
rh y y optic axis is in the z direction. (5)
oS Direction of propagation for achiev-
: oss x о <I k ing maximum der.
(a) (b) у
«ПИ
*22.7 DISPERSIVE NONLINEAR MEDIA
This section provides a brief discussion of the origin of dispersion and its effect on
nonlinear optical processes. Anisotropic dispersive media are briefly considered at the
end of this section. A dispersive medium is a medium with memory (see Sec. 5.2); the
polarization density P(t) resulting from an applied electric field E(t) does not appear
instantaneously. Rather, the response P(t) at time t is a function of the applied electric
field E(t’) at times # < $. When the medium is also nonlinear, the functional relation
between P(t) and {E(t), t/ < t} is nonlinear. There are two means for describing such
nonlinear dynamical systems:

1. A phenomenological integral relation between P(t) and €(t) based on а Volterra-
series expansion, which is similar to a Taylor-series expansion. The coefficients
of the expansion characterize the medium phenomenologically.

2. A nonlinear differential equation for P(t), with E(t) as a driving force, obtained
by developing a model for the physics of the polarization process, much as the
Lorentz model was developed for linear media.

Integral-Transform Description of Dispersive Nonlinear Media
If the deviation from linearity is small, a Volterra-series expansion may be used to
describe the relation between P(t) and €(t). The first term of the expansion is a linear

1070 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
combination of €(t’) for all t’ < t,
CO
P(t) = a x(t — t/)E(t’) dt’. (22.7-1)
—со
This describes a linear system with impulse response function €,x(t) [see Sec. 5.2,
particularly (5.2-23), and Appendix В].

The second term in the expansion is a superposition of the products €(t’)E(t”) at

pairs of times # < t and t” < t,

CO

P(t) = €, ] ] x(t — t,t —t”) E(t')E(t”) dt! dt”, (22.7-2)

—©
where x'?)(¢’, t’”) is a function of two variables that characterizes the second-order
dispersive nonlinearity. The third term represents a third-order nonlinearity that can
be characterized by a function x)(t’,t”,t’”) together with a similar triple-integral
relation.

The linear dispersive contribution described by (22.7-1) can also be completely
characterized by the response to monochromatic fields. If E(t) = Re{ E(w) exp(jwt)},
then P(t) = Re{ P(w) exp(jwt)}, where P(w) = €9x(w) E(w) and y(w) is the Fourier
transform of x(t) at v = w/27. The medium is then characterized completely by the
frequency-dependent susceptibility x(w).

The second-order nonlinear contribution described by (22.7-2) is characterized by
the response to a superposition of two monochromatic waves of angular frequencies
сл and и. Substituting

E(t) = Re{ E(w}) exp(jwit) + E(we) exp(jwet) } (22.7-3)
into (22.7-2), it can be shown that the polarization-density component of angular fre-
quency w3 = w, + we has an amplitude

The coefficient d(w3; w1,w2) is a frequency-dependent version of the nonlinear ор-
tical coefficient d in (22.2-13d). The relation between this coefficient and the response
function x(?)(t/, +") is established by defining

со
CP) (w1,w2) = ] ] x)", Е") exp[—j (wit! + wot”)] dt! dt", (22.7-5)
—с
which is the two-dimensional Fourier transform of х(2)(Ё,#") evaluated at иг =
—w,/2m and vp = —wy/2m [see (A.3-2) in Appendix А]. Substituting (22.7-3) into
(22.7-2) and using (22.7-5), we obtain
d(w3;w1,W2) = €oX) (wy, wy). (22.7-6a)
Thus, the second-order nonlinear dispersive medium is completely characterized by
either of the frequency-dependent functions, X) (w1,w2) or d(w3;w1,w2).

22.7 DISPERSIVE NONLINEAR MEDIA 1071

The degenerate case of second-harmonic generation in a second-order nonlinear
medium is also readily described by substituting &(Р) = Re{ E(w) exp(jwt)} into
(22.7-2) and using (22.7-5). The resultant polarization density has a component at
frequency 2w with amplitude P(2w) = d(2w;w,w) E(w)E(w), where

d(2w;w,w) = 160 (ш, в). (22.7-6b)
Other d coefficients representing various wave-mixing processes may similarly be
related to the two-dimensional function X(?) (w1,w2). The electro-optic effect, for ex-
ample, is a result of interaction between a steady electric field (w; = 0) and an optical
wave (> = и) to generate a polarization density at из = w. The pertinent coefficient
for this interaction is d(w;0,w) = 2€,X(?)(w, 0); it determines the Pockels coefficient
r in accordance with (22.2-11).

In a third-order nonlinear medium, an electric field comprising three harmonic
functions of angular frequencies ил, w2, and ws creates а sum-frequency polarization
density with a component at angular frequency илл = ил + и + из of amplitude

P(w4) = 6) (w4; wy, w2, W3) E(w) Е) E(ws), (22.7-7)
where the function х() (Ww4; W1, W2, из) replaces the nonlinear optical coefficient x)
that describes the nondispersive case. The function x) (w4; W1, W2,W3) can be deter-
mined from x") (t’, ¢”, t!”) by relations similar to (22.7-6a).

In short, as a consequence of dispersion, the second- and third-order coefficients d
and х() are dependent on the frequencies of the waves involved in the wave-mixing
process.

Differential-Equation Description of Dispersive Nonlinear Media
An example of a nonlinear dynamic relation between P(t) and E(t) is provided by the
differential equation
iP dP
Te + CF + woP + wo€ovob 2 = о воХо&, (22.7-8)
where С, wo, Хо, and b are constants. In the absence of the nonlinear term, w2e,xob P?,
(22.7-8) reduces to (5.5-15), which is appropriate for a linear resonant dielectric
medium described by the Lorentz oscillator model (see Sec. 5.5C). Each atom is then
characterized by a harmonic oscillator in which an electron of mass m is subjected
to an electric-field force —e€, an elastic restoring force —кхт, and a frictional force
тс dx/dt, where x is the displacement of the electron from its equilibrium position
and wp = 4/«/m is the resonance angular frequency. The medium is then linear and
dispersive with a susceptibility given by [see (5.5-18)]
wi
x(w) = Xx > (22.7-9)
wo — We + Jw Linear Susceptibility
(Harmonic-Oscillator)

When the restoring force is a nonlinear function of displacement, —кх — Ko,
where к and ко are constants, the result is an anharmonic oscillator described by (22.7-
8), where b is proportional to «2. The medium is then nonlinear.

1072 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
ee
EXERCISE 22.7-1
Polarization Density for an Anharmonic-Oscillator Medium. Show that for a medium
containing N atoms per unit volume, each modeled as an anharmonic (nonlinear) oscillator with
restraining force —Kx—K2x?, the relation between P(t) and & (+) is the nonlinear differential equation
(22.7-8), where хо = Ne?/€,mw? and b = k2/e3N”.
НИ
Equation (22.7-8) cannot be solved exactly. However, if the nonlinear term is small,
an iterative approach provides an approximate solution. Let (22.7-8) be written in the
form
L{P\ = € — bP”, (22.7-10)
where С = (weoVo) 1(d?/dt? + Cd/dt + w) is a linear differential operator. The
iterative solution of (22.7-10) is carried out via the following steps:
1. Find a first-order approximation P, by neglecting the nonlinear term b?? in
(22.7-10), and solving the linear equation
L{Pi} & E. (22.7-11)
2. Use this approximate solution to determine the small nonlinear term БР.
3. Obtain a second-order approximation by solving (22.7-10) with the term bP?
replaced by b ?. The solution of the resulting linear equation is denoted Po,
L{Po} = E — bP. (22.7-12)
4. Repeat the process to obtain a third-order approximation as illustrated by the
block diagram of Fig. 22.7-1.
Е Linear system P
(-) €oXw) Figure 22.7-1 Block diagram represent-
ing the nonlinear differential equation (22.7-
10). The linear system represented by the
operator equation £{P} = & has a transfer
P| function €,x(w).
bP? P
We first examine the special case of monochromatic light, € = Re{ E(w) exp(jwt) }.
In the first iteration P} = Re{P,(w) exp(jwt)}, where P;(w) = €ox(w)E(w) and
x(w) is given by (22.7-9). In the second iteration, the linear system is driven by a force
€ — bP? = Re{ E(w)e?"} — b[Re{e,x(w) E(w)e*}]”
= Re{ B(w)e™*} — 1bRef{[eox(w) Е (ше — 4b leox(w) Bw) [.
Since these three terms have frequencies w, 2w, and 0, the linear system responds
with susceptibilities y(w), y(2w), and х(0), respectively. The component of P2 at

22.7 DISPERSIVE NONLINEAR MEDIA 1073
frequency 2w has an amplitude Р›(2) = €ox(2w){—$b[eox(w)E(w)|?}. Since
P(2w) = d(2w; w,w)E(w) E(w), we conclude that

d(2w;w,w) = —$be3[y(w)]?x(2w). (22.7-13)
ee
EXERCISE 22.7-2
Miller’s Rule. Рог the nonlinear resonant medium described by (22.7-8), if the light comprises a
superposition of two monochromatic waves of angular frequencies w, and w2, show that the second-
order approximation described by (22.7-11) and (22.7-12) yields a component of polarization density
at frequency из = w; + we with amplitude Р› (из) = 2d(w3;w1,w2)E(w1)E(w2), where

d(w3;w1,W2) = —3b x (w1)x(wW2)x (ws). (22.7-14)

Miller's Rule
Equation (22.7-14) is known as Miller’s rule.
ee
Miller’s rule states that the coefficient of second-order nonlinearity for the generation
of a wave of frequency из = ил + 2, from two waves of frequencies ил and w,
is proportional to the product of the linear susceptibilities at the three frequencies,
x(w1)x(w2)x(w3). The three frequencies must therefore lie within the optical trans-
mission window of the medium (away from resonance). If these frequencies are much
smaller than the resonance frequency wo, then (22.7-9) gives x(w) = хо, and (22.7-
14) then yields d(w3;w ,w2) = —}be2x3, which is independent of frequency. The
medium is then approximately nondispersive, and the results of the previous sections
in which dispersion was neglected are applicable. Miller’s rule also indicates that
materials with large refractive indices (large Хо) tend to have large 4.
Anisotropic Dispersive Media
When both anisotropic and dispersive properties are considered, three-wave mixing in
a second-order medium is described by the more general relation
Раз) = 2S ` dij (wa; ал, w2) Ej (wi) Ex (we), (22.7-15)
jk
where из = ил + Wy. The coefficients dj;;, are now dependent on the frequencies of
the mixed waves. This relation is similar to the relation P;(w) = У; xij (w) Е; (w),
which describes linear media. Similarly, four-wave mixing in a third-order medium is
described by
3
P,(wa) =6 У `Х® (was wr, we, ws) Bj (wi) Ex(w2)Er(ws), | (227-16)
ля
where wy = им + wo + ws.

1074 CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
The frequency-dependent tensor components d,;,, and хо obey several intrinsic
symmetry relations that are similar to the relation y7;(w) = xi;(—w) in linear optics:
Чт (W33 W1,W2) = Ча (ил; —w2, w3)
* р
xe (или, W2,W3) = ХО ил; —W2, —W3, W4)
— , (3) . _ _ _
= X jin (WS; а, ал, —W2). (22.7-18)
In these relations, the coefficient а, (ил; —w2,w3), for example, represents a down-
conversion process in which a wave of frequency w». and polarization К mixes with
a wave of frequency ws and polarization 1 and generates a wave of frequency ил =
W3 — we and polarization 7. Other coefficients can be similarly interpreted. This type of
intrinsic symmetry is of course supplemented by other structural symmetry relations
that are obeyed for various classes of crystals.
READING LIST
Nonlinear Optics
See also the reading lists in Chapters 5, 6, 8, 21, and 23.
G. S. He and S. H. Liu, Advanced Nonlinear Optics, World Scientific, 2nd ed. 2018.
Y. Zhu, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Lu, and S. Zhu, Superlattices and Microstructures of Dielectric Mate-
rials: Quasi-Phase-Matching in Nonlinear Optics and Quantum Optics, De Gruyter, 2018.
A. Morita, Theory of Sum Frequency Generation Spectroscopy, Springer-Verlag, 2018.
G. S. He, Nonlinear Optics and Photonics, Oxford University Press, 2015.
Г. Lugiato, Е. Prati, and М. Brambilla, Nonlinear Optical Systems, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
P. D. Drummond and M. Hillery, The Quantum Theory of Nonlinear Optics, Cambridge University
Press, 2014.
S. Guha and L. P. Gonzalez, Laser Beam Propagation in Nonlinear Optical Media, CRC Press/Taylor
& Francis, 2014.
С. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, Academic Press/Elsevier, 5th ed. 2013.
P. E. Powers, Field Guide to Nonlinear Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 2013.
G. I. Stegeman and R. A. Stegeman, Nonlinear Optics: Phenomena, Materials and Devices, Wiley,
2012.
P. E. Powers, Fundamentals of Nonlinear Optics, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2011.
G. New, Introduction to Nonlinear Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2011.
P. Mandel, Nonlinear Optics, Wiley-VCH, 2010.
M. E. Marhic, Fiber Optical Parametric Amplifiers, Oscillators and Related Devices, Cambridge
University Press, 2008.
R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, Academic Press/Elsevier, 3rd ed. 2008.
R. Menzel, Photonics: Linear and Nonlinear Interactions of Laser Light and Matter, Springer-Verlag,
2nd ed. 2007.
M. Wegener, Extreme Nonlinear Optics: An Introduction, Springer-Verlag, 2005.
р. М. Nikogosyan, Nonlinear Optical Crystals: A Complete Survey, Springer-Verlag, 2005.
P. P. Banerjee, Nonlinear Optics: Theory, Numerical Modeling, and Applications, Marcel Dekker,
2004.
A. Brignon and J.-P. Huignard, eds., Phase Conjugate Laser Optics, Wiley, 2004.
T. Suhara and M. Fujimura, Waveguide Nonlinear-Optic Devices, Springer-Verlag, 2003.

PROBLEMS 1075
F. Kajzar and R. Reinisch, eds., Beam Shaping and Control with Nonlinear Optics, Plenum Press,
1998.
N. Bloembergen, Nonlinear Optics, World Scientific, 1965, 4th ed., 1996.
C. L. Tang and L. K. Cheng, Fundamentals of Optical Parametric Processes and Oscillators, Har-
wood, 1995.
J.-Y. Zhang, J. Y. Huang, and Y. R. Shen, Optical Parametric Generation and Amplification, Har-
wood, 1995.
J. Zyss, ed., Molecular Nonlinear Optics: Materials, Physics, and Devices, Academic Press, 1994.
J.-I. Sakai, Phase-Conjugate Optics, McGraw-Hill, 1992.
Р. №. Butcher and О. Cotter, The Elements of Nonlinear Optics, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
У. $. Butylkin, A. E. Kaplan, Yu. G. Khronopulo, and Е. I. Yakubovich, Resonant Nonlinear Interac-
tions of Light with Matter, Springer-Verlag, 1989.
M. Schubert and B. Wilhelmi, Nonlinear Optics and Quantum Electronics, Wiley, 1986.
B. Ya. Zel’dovich, N. F. Pilipetsky, and V. V. Shkunov, Principles of Phase Conjugation, Springer-
Verlag, 1985.
У. В. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, Wiley, 1984.
R. A. Fisher, ed., Optical Phase Conjugation, Academic Press, 1983.
Seminal Articles and Reprint Collections
Т. В. Gosnell, ed., Selected Papers on Upconversion Lasers, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Mile-
stone Series Volume 161), 2000.
J. H. Hunt, ed., Selected Papers on Optical Parametric Oscillators and Amplifiers and Their Appli-
cations, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 140), 1997.
J. Рейпа, ed., Selected Papers on Photon Statistics and Coherence in Nonlinear Optics, SPIE Optical
Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 39), 1991.
H. E. Brandt, ed., Selected Papers on Nonlinear Optics, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Milestone
Series Volume 32), 1991.
N. Bloembergen, Nonlinear Optics and Spectroscopy (Nobel Lecture in Physics, 1981), Reviews of
Modern Physics, vol. 54, pp. 685—695, 1982.
С. Н. С. New and J. Е. Ward, Optical Third-Harmonic Generation in Gases, Physical Review Letters,
vol. 19, pp. 556-559, 1967.
J. A. Armstrong, N. Bloembergen, J. Ducuing, and P. S. Pershan, Interactions Between Light Waves
in a Nonlinear Dielectric, Physical Review, vol. 127, pp. 1918—1939, 1962.
W. H. Louisell, A. Yariv, and A. E. Siegman, Quantum Fluctuations and Noise in Parametric Pro-
cesses. I., Physical Review, vol. 124, pp. 1646-1654, 1961.
P. A. Franken, A. E. Hill, C. W. Peters, and G. Weinreich, Generation of Optical Harmonics, Physical
Review Letters, vol. 7, pp. 118-119, 1961.
PROBLEMS
22.2-2 Power Exchange in Frequency Up-Conversion. А LiNbOs crystal of refractive index
п = 2.2 is used to convert light of free-space wavelength 1.3 um to light of free-space
wavelength 0.5 jum, using а three-wave mixing process. The three waves are collinear plane
waves traveling in the z direction. Determine the wavelength of the third wave (the pump).
If the power of the 1.3-~m wave decreases by 1 mW within an incremental distance Az,
what is the power gain of the up-converted wave and the power loss or gain of the pump
within the same distance?
22.2-3 Matching Conditions for Collinear Туре-П SHG. Determine the angle 6 for a КОР
crystal used in Type-II second-harmonic generation at \=1.06 ym for each of the o-e-
о and o-e-e configurations. Use the Sellmeier equations in Table 5.5-1 to determine the
wavelength dependence of the refractive indices.
22.2-4 Phase Matching in a Degenerate Parametric Downconverter. A degenerate parametric
downconverter uses а КОР crystal to downconvert light from 0.6 jm to 1.2 jum. If the two

1076 — CHAPTER 22 NONLINEAR OPTICS
waves are collinear, what is the proper direction of propagation of the waves (in relation to
the optic axis of the crystal), and their polarizations, so that the phase-matching condition
is satisfied? КПР is a uniaxial crystal with the following refractive indices: at Л, = 0.6 jum,
No = 1.509 and пе = 1.468; at Л. = 1.2 wm, по = 1.490 and п. = 1.459.

22.2-5 Matching Conditions for Three-Wave Mixing in a Dispersive Medium. The refractive
index of a nonlinear medium is a function of wavelength approximated by n(A,) = no —
Ло, where A, is the free-space wavelength and no and € are constants. Show that three
waves of wavelengths Лол, Ao2, and Лоз traveling in the same direction cannot be efficiently
coupled by a second-order nonlinear effect. Is efficient coupling possible if one of the waves
travels in the opposite direction?

*22.2-6 Tolerance to Phase Mismatching.

(a) The Helmholtz equation with a source, V?E+k? E = —S, has the solution [see (5.6-4)]

E(r) _ ] g(r!) РОЛ — г!) dr’,
у An|r — г'|
where У is the volume of the source and К, = 27/A,. This equation can be used to
determine the field emitted at a point r, given the source at all points r’ within the
source volume. If the source is confined to a small region centered about the origin
г = 0, and r is a point sufficiently far from the source so that r’ < r for all г’ within
the source, then |r — r’| = (r? +r? — 2r-r’)!/2 wr(1—4-r’/r?) and
~ exp(—jkor) / “La. pl! /
Е(г) = dar [se exp(jk r +r’) dr’,
where Г is a unit vector in the direction of г. Assuming that the volume У is a cube
of side L and the source 15 a harmonic function S(r) = exp(—jk, - г), show that if
L > Xo, the emitted light is maximized when k,r = k, and decreases sharply when
this condition is not met. Thus, a harmonic source of dimensions much greater than a
wavelength emits a plane wave with approximately the same wavevector.

(b) Use the relation in (a) and the first Born approximation to determine the scattered field
when the field incident on a second-order nonlinear medium is the sum of two waves
with wavevectors k, and kg. Derive the phase-matching condition Кз = К! + kz and
determine the smallest magnitude of Ak = Кз — К, — kp at which the scattered field
Е vanishes.

22.2-7 Backward SHG with QPM. Show that a periodically poled crystal may be used to generate
a second-harmonic wave traveling in a direction opposite to that of the fundamental wave.
Write the phase-matching equation for this quasi-phase-matched process. If the equation
is satisfied for the 7th-order harmonic of the periodic function, determine the ratio of the
poling period to the wavelength of the fundamental wave in the medium.

22.3-4 Invariants in Four-Wave Mixing. Derive equations for energy and photon-number conser-
vation (the Manley—Rowe relations) for four-wave mixing.

22.3-5 Power of a Spatial Soliton. Determine an expression for the integrated intensity of the
spatial soliton described by (22.3-12) and show that it is inversely proportional to the beam
width Wo.

22.3-6 An Opto-Optic Phase Modulator. Design a system for modulating the phase of an optical
beam of wavelength 546 nm and width W = 0.1 mm using a С$2 Kerr cell of length
Г = 10cm. The modulator is controlled by light from a pulsed laser of wavelength 694 nm.
CS, has a refractive index п = 1.6 and a coefficient of third-order nonlinearity x“) =
4.4 x 10-32 C-m/V°. Estimate the optical power P, of the controlling light required to
modulate the phase of the controlled light by м.

22.3-7 SHG in a Third-Order Nonlinear Medium via a Static Electric Field. Show that SHG
can take place in a third-order nonlinear medium with an applied static electric field. What
physical parameters determine the efficiency of this SHG process?

*22.4-7 Gain of a Parametric Amplifier. A parametric amplifier uses a 4-cm-long KDP crystal
(п = 1.49,d = 8.3 x 10-24 C/V’) to amplify light of wavelength 550 nm. The pump
wavelength is 335 nm and its intensity is 10° W/cm?. Assuming that the signal, idler, and
pump waves are collinear, determine the amplifier gain coefficient and the overall gain.

PROBLEMS 1077

*22.4-8 Degenerate Parametric Downconverter. Write and solve the coupled equations that de-
scribe wave mixing in a parametric downconverter with a pump at frequency из = 2w and
signals at ил = we = w. All waves travel in the z direction. Derive an expression for the
photon-flux densities at 2w and w and the conversion efficiency for an interaction length Г.
Verify that energy conservation and photon conservation are maintained.

*22.4-9 Threshold Pump Intensity for Parametric Oscillation. A parametric oscillator makes
use of a 5-cm-long LiNbOs crystal with a second-order nonlinear optical coefficient d =
4 x 10-23 C/V? and refractive index п = 2.2 (assumed to be approximately constant at
all frequencies of interest). The pump is obtained from a 1.06-jzm Nd:YAG laser that is
frequency doubled using a second-harmonic generator. The crystal is placed in a resonator
using identical mirrors with reflectances R = 0.98. Phase matching is satisfied when the sig-
nal and idler of the parametric amplifier are of equal frequencies. Determine the minimum
pump intensity required to achieve parametric oscillation.

*22.5-2 Combined SHG and SFG. Two waves of angular frequencies ил and 2, along with their
second-harmonic counterparts of angular frequencies 2w, and 2w2, and their sum-frequency
wave of angular frequency ил + we, interact simultaneously in a second-order nonlinear
medium. Assuming that phase matching is satisfied for the two SHG processes and for
the SFG process, write coupled equations for this five-wave-mixing process. Solve these
equations numerically and demonstrate that the presence of the second wave may suppress
the SHG process for the first.

*22.5-3 Coupled-Wave Equations for Degenerate Four-Wave Mixing. Consider the collinear
four-wave-mixing problem in a third-order nonlinear medium, in the degenerate case w4 =
w3 and ил + we = 2w3. Derive coupled wave equations for the amplitudes A, Az, and Аз
assuming that the phase-matching condition is fully met.

*22.6-1 СоШтеаг Туре-П Three-Wave Mixing in a BBO Crystal. Repeat the analysis carried
out in Example 22.6-1 to demonstrate that the effective nonlinear coefficient Чен for
Type-II о-е-е three-wave mixing for a crystal in the 3m group, such as BBO, is dog =
422 cos? 6 cos 3¢.

*22.6-2 Relation Between Nonlinear-Optical and Electro-Optic Coefficients. Show that the
electro-optic coefficients are related to the coefficients of optical nonlinearity by rij, =
—4eodizn/€ix€j; and зщ = = 12x, /€€;;. These relations are generalizations of
(22.2-11) and (22.3-2), respectively. Hint: If two matrices A and В are related by В = A7?,
the incremental matrices AA and AB are related by AB = -А 'ДАА-".

CHAPTER
ee
ULTRAFAST OPTICS
23.1 PULSE CHARACTERISTICS 1079

A. Temporal and Spectral Characteristics
B. Gaussian and Chirped Gaussian Pulses
C. Spatial Characteristics
23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION 1088
A. Chirp Filters
B. Implementations of Chirp Filters
C. Pulse Compression
D. Pulse Shaping
23.3 PULSE PROPAGATION IN OPTICAL FIBERS 1102
A. The Optical Fiber as a Chirp Filter
B. Propagation of a Gaussian Pulse in an Optical Fiber
*C. Slowly Varying Envelope Diffusion Equation
*D. Analogy Between Dispersion and Diffraction
23.4 ULTRAFAST LINEAR OPTICS 1115
A. Вау Optics
*В. Wave and Fourier Optics
*C. Beam Optics
23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1126
A. Pulsed Parametric Processes
B. Optical Solitons
*C. Supercontinuum Light
*D. High-Harmonic Generation and Attosecond Optics
23.6 PULSE DETECTION 1146
A. Measurement of Intensity
B. Measurement of Spectral Intensity
C. Measurement of Phase
*D. Measurement of Spectrogram
( \ =
у. i; 41
д РУ
Раш В. Corkum (born 1943) (left) was the principal progenitor of the field of attosecond optics;
James P. Gordon (1928-2013) greatly advanced our understanding of optical solitons; and Gérard
Mourou (born 1944) (right) implemented optical chirped-pulse amplification with Donna Strickland,
for which they shared the Nobel Prize with Arthur Ashkin in 2018.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa Е. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1078

CSC

The study of optical pulses began in earnest with the invention of the laser because
the earliest lasers could only emit light in the form of pulses; the development of CW
lasers required significant additional effort. Interest in the characteristics and behavior
of ultrashort optical pulses flourished as progress was made in generating optical pulses
of shorter and shorter duration, with concomitantly larger and larger peak intensity. The
generation of nanosecond optical pulses was followed by the generation of picosecond
pulses, then femtosecond pulses, and finally attosecond pulses. Progress in generating
ultrashort and ultrahigh-intensity (or ultrahigh-field-strength) optical pulses was fueled
by the many important applications spawned by their availability. These include non-
linear frequency conversion; the probing of ultrafast physical, chemical, and biological
processes; the generation of spatially coherent X-ray beams; multiphoton imaging;
materials processing; and ultrafast optical fiber communications.

In the context of optics, the terms ultrafast and ultrashort are generally used to
describe pulse durations that lie in the range of hundreds-of-femtoseconds to atto-
seconds. In electronics, however, these same terms refer to much longer pulses, namely
durations of nanoseconds to tens-of-picoseconds, since the speed at which electronics
operates lies well below that for optics. A nanosecond electrical pulse roughly has
a GHz spectral width and so must be guided by a broadband microwave circuit. A
picosecond electrical pulse, on the other hand, has a THz spectral width, which cannot
be sustained by conventional electronic or microwave circuitry. Were a femtosecond
electrical pulse to be generated, it would extend over a spectral band that spans the
entire frequency range from DC to a PHz, beyond the ultraviolet edge of the visible
band. By virtue of the time—energy uncertainty relation o¢ 0+ > h/2 provided in (13.1-
17), the energy uncertainty of such a pulse would exceed the bandgap energy of a
typical semiconductor (Е, = 1.5 eV), rendering conventional electronics unreliable.
This Chapter
Ultrashort optical pulses may be directly generated by specially designed lasers that
incorporate particular switching schemes or mode-locking methods (see Sec. 16.4).
However, the shortest pulses capable of being directly generated by such devices are
often not sufficiently short for certain applications. In this chapter, we demonstrate how
ultrashort pulses can be shortened yet further, as well as reshaped, by making use of
nonlinear dispersive optical components and systems.

The chapter begins with a description of the basic temporal and spectral charac-
teristics of optical pulses (Sec. 23.1) and then considers their filtering by: (1) linear
dispersive bulk optical components such as prisms and gratings (Sec. 23.2); and (2)
transmission through linear dispersive media such as optical fibers (Sec. 23.3). Spatial
effects, and the optics of pulsed waves with ultrabroad spectral widths, are examined
in Sec. 23.4. The nonlinear optics of pulsed waves is addressed in Sec. 23.5, where
several of the CW nonlinear optical phenomena introduced in Chapter 22, including
parametric wave mixing, self-phase modulation, and optical solitons, are generalized
to pulsed waves. Finally, various methods of measuring ultrashort optical pulses using
“slow” detectors are reported in Sec. 23.6.

23.1 PULSE CHARACTERISTICS
A. Temporal and Spectral Characteristics
A pulse of light is described by an optical field of finite time duration. In this chapter
we rely on the scalar wave theory of Chapter 2, representing the field components
1079

1080 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

with a generic complex wavefunction U(r, $) normalized such that the optical intensity
is I(r,t) = |U(r,t)|? (W/m?). When we are concerned with only the temporal or
spectral properties of a pulse at a fixed position г, we simply use the functions 0 (1)
and I(t).

Temporal and Spectral Representations

The complex wavefunction describing an optical pulse of central frequency 0 is writ-
ten in the form U(t) = A(t) exp(jwot), where A(t) is the complex envelope and
Wo = 2 is the central angular frequency. The complex envelope itself is char-
acterized by its magnitude |A(t)| and phase y(t) = arg{A(t)}, so that U(t) =
|A(t)| exp (моё + y(t)]). The optical intensity I(t) = |U(t)|? = АР (W/m?)
and the area under the intensity function f I(t)dt is the energy density (J/m?).

The intensity profiles of typical pulses include the Gaussian function, I(t) «
exp(—2t?/r”) (which is examined in detail in Sec. 23.1B), the Lorentzian function
I(t) х 1/(1 + t?/7?), and the hyperbolic-secant function I(t) сс sech?(t/7) (which
appears in Sec. 23.5B in connection with optical solitons). The width of each of these
pulses is proportional to the time constant T.

In the spectral domain, the pulse is described by the Fourier transform V(v) =
J U(t) exp(—j2nvt)dt, which is a complex function V(v) = |V(v)|exp[jv(v)].
The squared magnitude S(v) = |V(v)|° is called the spectral intensity and 7)(v)
is the spectral phase. The function V(v) is centered at the central frequency vp and
vanishes for negative v since U(t) is acomplex analytic signal (Sec. 2.6A). The Fourier
transform of the complex envelope, A(v) = Г A(t) exp(—j2rvt)dt = V(v — v), is
centered at и = 0. If the pulse has a narrow spectral width, then the complex envelope
is a slowly varying function of time (i.e., varies slightly within an optical cycle 1/vo),
but this is not the case for ultranarrow pulses with ultrawide spectral distributions.
Figure 23.1-1 illustrates the various temporal and spectral functions that characterize
an optical pulse.

Wavefunction Envelope Intensity 1() Phase (2) Spectral Spectral
Re{U()} Vv y ИО] ts № < _ intensity S(v) | | phase (и)
/ м „77 _ =” a

“ t t 7 И и

(а) Temporal representation (b) Spectral representation
Figure 23.1-1 Temporal and spectral representations of an optical pulse. (a) The real part of the
wavefunction Re{U(t)} = |.A(t)| cos[wot + y(t)], the magnitude of the envelope |.A(t)|, the intensity
I(t), and the phase y(t). (b) Spectral intensity $(v) and spectral phase 7(v).
Temporal and Spectral Widths
The temporal and spectral widths of a pulse are the widths of the intensity [(t) =
|U(t)|? and the spectral intensity S(v) = |V(v)|?, respectively, as defined by any of
the measures of width set forth in Appendix A.2. Unless otherwise specified, we will
use the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) definition and denote the temporal and
spectral widths as Tpwu and Av, respectively.

Because of the Fourier-transform relation between U(t) and V(v), the spectral
width is inversely proportional to the temporal width. The coefficient of proportion-
ality depends on the pulse shape and the definition of width. This inverse relation is
illustrated in Fig. 23.1-2(a) for a Gaussian pulse for which тины Аи = 0.44.

23.1 PULSE CHARACTERISTICS 1081
Av Av —
©» “о. Oo оо)
Z бо Z 5
100 GHz RNY % | | 100 GHz | | Z | | | |
Lic
‘Oo.

@) я = = () = o7 8 ec
Figure 23.1-2 (a) The relation Av = 0.44/tpwum between the spectral width Av and the
temporal width Tpwum for a Gaussian pulse. (b) The corresponding width АЛ for a pulse of central
frequency хо corresponding to the central wavelengths Ло = c/vp = 0.5 ит, 1 ym, and 1.5 um. As
an example, а 10-fs pulse has a spectral width Av = 44 THz, corresponding to АЛ = 37 nm, 147 nm,
and 331 nm, if the central wavelength is Ло = 0.5 wm, 1 ут, and 1.5 jum, respectively, as indicated
by the open circles in the graph. This relation is linear if Ди < vp [see (23.1-1)].

The spectral intensity S(v) is often plotted as a function of the wavelength,
S)(A). This conversion is obtained by use of the relation $\(A) = S(v)|dv/dA| =
(с/^?)5(с/^). The spectral width Av may also be converted into wavelength units.
If Av < vp, then the spectral width in wavelength units is approximately AA =
|\d\/dv| Av, or

2
АЛ = Ap, (23.1-1)
с Spectral Width
where Ло = с/о is the wavelength corresponding to the central frequency. If Av is in
units of THz, Ao in ит, and АЛ in nm, then
АЛ = 3.3A2 Av AX [nm]; Ло [um]; Av [THz]. (23.1-2)
For example, a spectral width Av = 1 THz corresponds to AA = 1 nm at Ло = 0.55
pum, and to 4 пт at Ло = 1.1 wm. This relation is illustrated in 23.1-2(6).

For ultranarrow pulses with large Av, the exact expression for АЛ is

A\ = ——* co Ag AY (23.1-3)

~ vg—Av/2 vt Av/2 © 1— (Av/2%)?" ,

However, under these conditions, the concept of spectral width loses its significance.

А 2-fs pulse, e.g., has spectral width Av = 220 THz, corresponding to АЛ = 847 nm at

Ло = 1 р, 1.е., the spectrum is quite broad and extends from visible through infrared.

Instantaneous Frequency

Another descriptor of the optical pulse is the time dependence of its instantaneous

frequency. The instantaneous angular frequency ил is the derivative of the phase of
U(t), and the instantaneous frequency м; = w;/27, so that

4 1а
м = wy +, Y= vo (23.1-4)
п Instantaneous Frequency

1082 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

If the phase is a linear function of time, y(t) = 27 ft, then the instantaneous frequency
и = м + f; ie., a linearly varying phase corresponds to a fixed frequency shift.
Nonlinear time dependence of the phase corresponds to time-dependent instantaneous
frequency.

Chirped Pulses

A pulse is said to be chirped, or frequency modulated (FM), if its instantaneous
frequency is time varying. Ки is an increasing function of time at the pulse center
(t = 0), 1е., р’ = d?p/dt? > 0, then the pulse is said to be up-chirped. If 1; is a
decreasing function of time at the pulse center, 1.е., р” < 0, it is said to be down-
chirped.

In particular, if the phase of an optical pulse of width 7 is a quadratic function of
time (p(t) = аЁ /т?, where a is a constant, then yp” = 2a/7? so that the instantaneous
frequency и = м + (а/лт?){ is а linear function of time. The pulse is then said to be
linearly chirped and the parameter

а = so"? _  (23.1-5)
Chirp Parameter
is called the chirp parameter. The pulse is up-chirped if а > 0 and down-chirped
На < 0. Att = 7/2, the instantaneous frequency increases by a/2a7, which is
of the order of magnitude of aAv. Thus, the chirp parameter is indicative of the
ratio between the instantaneous frequency change at the pulse half-width point and
the spectral width Av. Examples of linearly chirped pulses and their instantaneous
frequencies are illustrated in Fig. 23.1-3.
Re{U()} Re{ UO}
t t
as R—~>B a) B—R
2 = 400 2 = 400
OW м ov т]
Е a: 8 >30 пет
Я 5200 Я 5200
ЕЕ ae
58 ЕН
—20 0 0 (fs) —20 0 20st (fs)
(а) (b)
Figure 23.1-3 Linearly up-chirped and down-chirped optical pulses. (a) An up-chirped pulse has
an increasing instantaneous frequency. (b) A down-chirped pulse has a decreasing instantaneous
frequency. In this figure, the pulse width is 20 fs and the central frequency ш = 300 THz. The
letters R and B, which represented red and blue, are generic indicators of long and short wavelengths,
respectively.

If the dependence of the phase y on time is an arbitrary nonlinear function, as in
Fig. 23.1-1, then it can be approximated by a Taylor-series expansion in the vicinity
of the pulse center, and the chirp coefficient a defined by (23.1-5) then represents the
lowest-order chirping effect resulting from the quadratic term of the expansion.

23.1 PULSECHARACTERISTICS 1083
Time-Varying Spectrum
It is often useful to trace the spectral changes of a time-varying pulse throughout its
time course. Such changes are obscured in the Fourier transform, which only provides
an average spectral representation of the entire signal without noting which frequen-
cies occur at which times. This is particularly evident if the signal is composed of a
sequence of segments each with a different spectral composition. A good example is a
musical signal for which the spectral changes indicate changes of the musical score as
time progresses.

While the instantaneous frequency can be a measure of the time-dependent nature of
the spectrum, it is not always adequate since it is based only on the phase and ignores
the amplitude. A commonly used measure is based on a sliding window, or gate, that
selects only one short time segment at a time, and obtains the Fourier transform of the
pulse within the window duration. This is repeated at different locations of the sliding
window, as illustrated in Fig. 23.1-4, and the result is plotted as a function of both
frequency and time delay. The resultant 2D function is called the short-time Fourier
transform. Its squared magnitude is called the spectrogram and is often plotted as a
picture with the horizontal and vertical axes representing time and frequency, respec-
tively, as illustrated in Fig. 23.1-4.

U(t) « sll ie И ИА

Ween) С Figure 23.1-4 The — short-time
Fourier transform of U(t) is constructed
U()W(t-71) Hh - by making use of a sequence of Fourier
transforms of U/(t) multiplied by
ОИ 1) — a moving window W(t — т). The
МЕ т __—_f__1_________________ spectrogram 5(и,т) is the squared
Ома тд) \/\ net ANNA, _ magnitude of these Fourier transforms.
In this example, U(t) comprises two
Gaussian pulses, each of time constant T
v(THz) $(,т) = 60 fs and central frequency 100 THz.
Г —| The first pulse is up-chirped (a = 5)
whereas the second, which has a smaller
100 amplitude, is down-chirped (а = —5).
The window function W(t) is Gaussian

50 with time constant 7 = 20 fs.

0 100 200 300 т (fs)

If W(t) is a window function of short duration T beginning at ¢ = 0, and if U(t)
is the pulse wavefunction, then the product U(t)W (t — т) is a segment of the pulse of
duration T’ beginning at time т. The Fourier transform of the segment is

O(v,T) = [roe — т) exp(—j2avt)dt. (23.1-6)

Short-Time

Fourier Transform

The function ®(v,7) is the short-time Fourier transform and its squared magnitude
S(v,T) = |®(v,7)|? is the spectrogram.

1084 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
B. Gaussian and Chirped Gaussian Pulses
Transform-Limited Gaussian Pulse
A transform-limited Gaussian pulse has a complex envelope with constant phase and
Gaussian magnitude, so that
A(t) = Ao exp(—t?/77), (23.1-7)

where т is a real time constant. The intensity (К = Ig exp(—2t?/77) is also a
Gaussian function, with peak value /о = |Ao|?, 1/e full width У2т, and FWHM

Тринм = V2In27 = 1.187. (23.1-8)

The Fourier transform of the complex envelope, A(v) сх exp (—л?т?и?), is a

Gaussian function, and so is the spectral intensity
S(v) « exp [—20?77(v — V9)" | . (23.1-9)
The FWHM of the spectral intensity is
Ди = 0.375/т = 0.44/Tewum, (23.1-10)
so that the product of the FWHM temporal and spectral widths is тины Аи = 0.44.
Figure 23.1-5(qa) illustrates the temporal and spectral characteristics of the transform-
limited Gaussian pulse.

As discussed in Appendix A.2, the transform-limited Gaussian pulse has a minimum
temporal- and spectral-width product, and this is why it is called transform limited (also
called Fourier-transform limited or bandwidth limited).

Though the Gaussian pulse has an ideal shape that is not encountered exactly in
practice, it is a useful approximation that lends itself to analytical studies.

Chirped Gaussian Pulse
A more general Gaussian pulse has a complex envelope A(t) = Ap exp (—at”) , where
а = (1 — 71а) /т? is a complex parameter and т and a are real parameters, so that
A(t) = Ao exp(—t?/1”) ехр(даЁ /т?). (23.1-11)
The magnitude of the complex envelope is a Gaussian function | A9| exp(—t?/7?) and
the intensity is also Gaussian. The phase is a quadratic function ф = at?/r? so that
the instantaneous frequency и = и + at/77? is a linear function of time; i.e., the
pulse is linearly chirped with chirp parameter a. The pulse is up-chirped for positive
a, down-chirped for negative a, and transform-limited (unchirped) for a = 0. The
Fourier transform of the complex envelope A(t) = Ao exp (—at?) is proportional
to exp (—л2т?и? / а), which is also a Gaussian function of frequency. The spectral
intensity S(v) is proportional to exp |—27°7?(v — м)? /(1 + a”)], which is Gaussian
with FWHM Ди = (0.375/7)V1 4+ a? = (0.44/Trwum)V 1 + a?. This is a factor of
/1 + a? greater than that of an unchirped pulse (a = 0) of the same time constant т.
The product of the FWHM temporal and spectral widths is TrwawAv = 0.44V1 + a?,
so that the unchirped Gaussian pulse (a = 0) has the smallest temporal- and spectral-
width product. The spectral phase ~(v) сх av? is a quadratic function of frequency.

Key equations characterizing the chirped Gaussian pulse are provided in Table 23. 1-
1. Figure 23.1-5 illustrates the temporal and spectral characteristics of transform-
limited and chirped Gaussian pulses.

23.1 PULSE CHARACTERISTICS 1085
Table 23.1-1 Temporal and spectral properties of a chirped Gaussian pulse of peak amplitude Ao,
peak intensity Jo = |Ao|”, central frequency vo, time constant т, and chirp parameter a.
A(t) = Ao exp[—(1 — ja)t?/7?] Complex envelope (23.1-12)
I(t) = Ip exp(—2t?/7?) Intensity (23.1-13)
[Та = ут/2 т Energy density (23.1-14)
тие = V2T 1/e half width (23.1-15)
Tewum = 1.187 FWHM width (23.1-16)
p(t) = at? /7? Phase (23.1-17)
A 22,2
A(v) = _УтАот_ ехр | Fourier transform (23.1-18)
VJ (1 - ja) 1—ja
п Пт? 21212 (и — и . .
S(v) = ————= exp | Spectral intensit 23.1-19
(v) ae? Tae р у ( )
2
Де = —V1 +a? 1/е half width (23.1-20)
T
0.375 0.44 .
Av = —vVl1+a? = —vVl+a? FWHM spectral width (23.1-21)
T Tr WHM
wv) = —2n?7?[a/(1 + а?) |? Spectral phase (23.1-22)
и = и + (a/ar?)t Instantaneous frequency (23.1-23)
3 15 1 0.75 0.6 Aum)
Re{U(O}
(a) Transform-
limited pulse t
(b) Up-chirped
pulse t
(c) Down-chirped
pulse t
-10 - 0 10 t(fs) 0 00 200 300 400 500 v (THz)
Figure 23.1-5 Temporal and spectral profiles of three Gaussian pulses of central frequency =
300 THz (corresponding to a wavelength of 1 ила and а 3.3-fs optical cycle) and width Tew = 5 fs
(7 = 4.23 fs). (a) Transform-limited pulse; the spectral width Ди = 88 THz (АЛ = 73 nm). (b) Up-
chirped pulse of chirp parameter a = 2; the spectral width is a factor of \/1 + a? = V5 greater than in
(a), so that Av = 197 THz. The instantaneous frequency is a linearly increasing function of time with
value = 300 THz at ¢ = 0 (center of the pulse) and values и; = vo(1 + at/mvpr) = 300(1 £0.497)
THz at t = +7. The frequency is swept between 151 THz and 449 THz as ¢ changes from —т to +7.
This corresponds to a change of the wavelength between 0.67 wm and 1.99 jum. (с) Same as in (5)
but the pulse is down-chirped with chirp parameter a = —2.

1086 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
C. Spatial Characteristics
In this section we examine a few simple examples of pulsed optical waves traveling
in free space or, alternatively, in a linear, homogeneous, and nondispersive medium.
In such media, in accordance with (2.2-4), the complex wavefunction U (г, +) obeys
the wave equation V?U — (1/c”)0?U/dt? = 0. The simplest exact solutions of this
equation are the pulsed plane wave and the pulsed spherical wave. We discuss these
solutions and also introduce the pulsed Gaussian beam. A more detailed study of the
spatial properties of pulsed light is deferred to Sec. 23.4.
Pulsed Plane Wave
As discussed in Sec. 2.6A, a pulsed plane wave traveling in the z direction has a
complex wavefunction of the form U(r,t) = A(t — z/c) exp|jwo(t — z/c)], where
A(t) is an arbitrary function. The corresponding intensity is I(t — z/c), where I(t) =
|A(t)|?. If the width of I(t) is т, then the traveling pulse occupies a distance Az = ст
at any time and travels without change at a velocity c, as illustrated in Fig. 23.1-6.
Numerical values of the pulse temporal and spatial widths in free space are:
Temporal width т 1 ns 1 ps 1 fs las
Spatial width ст 30cm 03mm 0.3 ит 0.3nm
$52 | -/\-= .
АЕ ИЕ я! a Figure 23.1-6 The envelope of a plane-
NVA = =] | Я! ex wave pulse of width 7 traveling in the
uA | я 7 Эт z direction with velocity с. The pulse
LT '|KE BS —___» occupies a distance ст at any time.
cAt <
A pulsed plane wave traveling at an angle 9 with the z axis has a complex wavefunc-
tion U(r,t) = Alt — («sin @ + 20030) /с] exp |—jko(x sin 6 + z cos @)] exp(jwot)
and intensity J [Е — (xsin@ + zcos@)/c], where I(t) = |A(t)|?. If this intensity is
recorded as a function of x and z in a sequence of snapshots (each at a fixed time),
then the result is as illustrated in Fig. 23.1-7(a). The bright stripe in each snapshot
represents the traveling pulse at a given time. For example, a 100-fs pulse in free
space appears as a stripe of width 30 ит. Note that a single vertical line (fixed z)
intercepting the stripe in a single snapshot (fixed +) provides a complete record of the
pulse temporal profile since it records the function J(—x sin 6/c+ constant). Thus, the
temporal profile may be measured by observing the spatial profile of a snapshot of the
pulse. This can be utilized for pulse detection, as will be discussed in Sec. 23.5B.
Pulsed Spherical Wave
Another simple solution of the wave equation is the pulsed spherical wave U(r, t) =
(1/r)g(t — r/c) exp|jwo(t — r/c)], where g(t) is an arbitrary function. The pulse
expands radially and its wavefronts are concentric spheres, as illustrated in Fig. 23.1-
7(b). At any fixed time, it occupies a spherical shell of radial width ст, where т is the
width of g(t).
* Paraxial Wave Modulated by Slowly Varying Pulse
When the envelope of a pulsed wave varies slowly with time so that it is approximately
constant within an optical cycle, it is said to have a slowly varying envelope (SVE).
Because of the associated narrow spectral width, Av < vo, the spatial behavior is

23.1 PULSE CHARACTERISTICS 1087
approximately the same as that of a monochromatic (CW) wave at the central frequency
Vo or the wavelength Ло = с/о. The wave may therefore be regarded as a quasi-CW
pulsed wave.

If the wave is also paraxial (see Sec. 2.2C), it may be expressed in terms of its
envelope in the general form U(r,t) = A(r,t) exp(—jkoz) exp(jwot), where the
envelope varies slowly with z so that it is approximately constant within a distance
equal to a wavelength Ло = 27/kpo; 1.е., the condition 07A/0z? < k?A is satisfied.
Since the envelope is also slowly varying in time, the approximation 07A/0t? < uA
is also applicable. Under such conditions, the wave equation V?U — (1/c?)6°U/0t? =
0 leads to an approximate equation for the envelope,

4n (OA 110A
V2A—j— (= + 1%) = 0, (23.1-24)
Ло \ 02 с Ot Рагажа! SVE Equation
where V7, = 02/02? + 0° /Oy? is the transverse Laplacian operator. Equation (23.1-
24) is known as the paraxial SVE equation. For a CW wave, 0A/0t = 0 and (23.1-24)
reproduces the paraxial Helmholtz equation (2.2-23).

As can be seen by direct substitution, (23.1-24) is satisfied by A(p, z,t) = g(t —
z/c)Ao(r), where д is an arbitrary function of the retarded time t — z/c and Ао(г)
satisfies the paraxial Helmholtz equation V7.A9 — j(47/A0)OA0/Oz = 0, which is
applicable in the CW case. It follows that in this approximation a paraxial wave at the
wavelength Ло may be modulated by a slowly varying pulse of arbitrary shape, without
altering its spatial behavior.
| time — | time — | time —>

(a) Plane wave < (b) Spherical wave ° (c) Gaussian beam °
Figure 23.1-7 (a) Four snapshots (taken at equal time intervals) of a pulsed plane wave traveling
at an angle. Each snapshot contains a single line of width ст (in the = direction), where т is the pulse
width. The line moves from left to right as the pulsed wave propagates. (b) Same as (a) but for a
spherical wave; (с) Same as (a) but for a Gaussian beam.

Pulsed Gaussian Beam
One of the solutions of the paraxial Helmholtz equation is the Gaussian beam described
by (3.1-5). In the pulsed quasi-CW case, the Gaussian beam is given by

A(p,2,t) = g(t — z/) 2 ( TP (23.1-25)

2,0) = — 2/C — exp | —j— - , .1-
p 9 z+ 720 р 2+0

where g(t) is an arbitrary slowly varying function of the retarded time t — z/c and zo
is the Rayleigh range (also called the diffraction length). In this approximation, except
for the retardation effect, there is no coupling between space and time; i.e., the beam
maintains its Gaussian spatial profile at all times, and the pulse maintains its initial
temporal profile at all positions. Snapshots of such a beam are illustrated in Fig. 23.1-
7(c).

1088 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

It will be shown in Sec. 23.4 that for ultranarrow pulses, for which the SVE approx-
imation is not applicable, space-time coupling can be significant, and a wave that is
Gaussian in time and space in a given transverse plane becomes non-Gaussian in both
time and space as it propagates in free space.

23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION

The temporal profile of a short optical pulse is unavoidably altered as it travels through
a dispersive optical system. This is because the individual spectral components that
constitute the pulse are attenuated and/or phase shifted by different amounts. The
shorter the optical pulse, the greater is its spectral width and thus the more dramatic is
the effect of dispersion. On the other hand, dispersive optical elements may be designed
to effect desired changes in the shape of an optical pulse, such as compression or
stretching.

In this section, we study only temporal effects in linear dispersive optical media, 1.е.,
only pulsed plane waves are considered. A discussion of spatial effects in linear optical
media, including diffraction and beam propagation in dispersive media, is reserved for
Sec. 23.4. Dispersion in nonlinear systems is examined in Sec. 23.5.

A. Chirp Filters
Linear Filtering of an Optical Pulse
The transmission of an optical pulse through an arbitrary linear optical system is gener-
ally described by the theory of linear systems (see Appendix B). A linear time-invariant
system is characterized by a transfer function H(v), which is the factor by which the
Fourier component of the input pulse at frequency v is multiplied to generate the output
component at the same frequency. If 01 (+) and U2(t) are the complex wavefunctions
of the original and filtered pulses, respectively, then their Fourier transforms У1 (и) and
Vo(v) are related by

Va(v) = H(v) Vi(v). (23.2-1)

In using (23.2-1) we only need to know H(v) at frequencies within the spectral band
of the pulse, which is a region of width Av surrounding the central frequency vo, as
illustrated in Fig. 23.2-1. When Av < vp, it is convenient to work with the complex
envelope instead of the wavefunction. Using the relation U(t) = A(t) exp(j2mvt)
and the shift property of the Fourier transform, V(v) = A(v — vo), where A(v) is the
Fourier transform of A(t), it follows from (23.2-1) that А2(и=ш) = H(v)Ai(v—1),
where the subscripts 1 and 2 denote the input and output pulses, respectively. Defining
the frequency difference f = и — м, we obtain Ao(f) = H(v + Л) Ai(f), or

Ao(f) = He(f)Ar(f); (23.2-2)
where
He(f) = H(vo + f) (23.2-3)
Envelope Transfer Function
is called the envelope transfer function. Working with (23.2-2) is generally more
convenient than working with (23.2-1), since the frequency f is typically much smaller
than v. These relations are illustrated in Fig. 23.2-1.

The transfer functions H(v) and H.(f) are complex functions, H(v) = |H(v)|

exp[—jW(v)] and H.(f) = |H-(f)|exp[—jW-(f)], where U.(f) = Ф(щ + f) are

23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION 1089
| we
1 4 |H (и t
Е 2
Input complex - Output complex
wavefunction Uj(t) Filter H(v) wavefunction U(t)
ZN Vel) 7
Input complex 1 uv [Не] Output complex t
envelope A,(f) — f envelope A(t)
Envelope filter He(f) = H(v +f)
Figure 23.2-1 Filtering the wavefunction with a filter H(v) (upper figure) is equivalent to filtering
the envelope with a filter H.(f) = H(vo + f) (lower figure). The shaded area represents the spectral
band of interest.
real functions representing the phase transfer. The phase introduced by the filter often
plays a more important role than the magnitude in the reshaping of pulses. Throughout
this chapter we will deal with phase filters, 1.е., filters for which the magnitude |H(v)|
is approximately constant within the frequency range of interest.
When transformed to the time domain, (23.2-2) becomes the convolution relation
CO
А2(® = ] h(t —t’) А (Рае, (23.2-4)
—с
where А. ($) is the inverse Fourier transform of H.(f).
The Ideal Filter
An ideal filter preserves the shape of the input pulse envelope; it merely multiplies
it by a constant (of magnitude < 1 for an attenuator and > 1 for an amplifier), and
possibly delays it by a fixed time. The transfer function has the form
H.(f) = Ho exp (—j27 Taf) , (23.2-5)
where Но is a constant, G = |Ho|? is the intensity reduction or gain factor, and Tq
is the time delay. The phase is a linear function of frequency U.(f) = Фо + 27Taf,
where Фо = arg{Ho} is a constant phase [see Fig. 23.2-2(a)]. Using a basic Fourier-
transform property (see Appendix A), the phase 2774 f is equivalent to a time delay
та. The input and output envelopes are related by Ag(t) = HoAi(t — та), and the
intensities are related by [2(t) = СП (+ — та). For a distributed attenuator/amplifier
of attenuation/gain coefficient a, velocity c, and length d, the transfer function is
H.(f) = exp (—ad/2) exp (—j2afd/c) so that С = exp(—ad) and та = а/с.
A slab of ideal nondispersive material with attenuation coefficient a and refractive
index n is an example of such filter, where c = c,/n. Here, the transfer function
H(v) = exp(—ad/2) exp (—jGd), where В = 2ли/с is the propagation constant
(see Sec. 5.5A), and Н.(}) = exp(—ad/2) exp (—j27fd/c). When a and п are
frequency dependent, i.e., the medium is dispersive, the filter is not ideal and the pulse
shape may be significantly altered, as will be shown in Sec. 23.3.
The Chirp Filter
Perhaps the most important filter in ultrafast optics is the Gaussian chirp filter, often
simply called the chirp filter. It is a phase filter whose phase is a quadratic function of

1090 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
frequency Ф.(}) = br? f? [see Fig. 23.2-2(b)] so that the envelope transfer function is
Gaussian,
H.(f) = exp (—jbr?f?) , (23.2-6)
Chirp-Filter
Transfer Function
where b is a real parameter (units of s”) called the chirp coefficient of the filter. For
b > 0 the filter is said to be up-chirping, and for b < 0 it is down-chirping.
The corresponding impulse response function is the inverse Fourier transform of
(23.2-6) (see Table A.1-1), which is another Gaussian function
he(t) 1 (92/5) (23.2-7)
e(t) = —— exp(j .2-
Vijnb Chirp-Filter
Impulse Response Function
It too has a phase that is a quadratic function of time, 1.е., it is a linearly chirped
function, which is up-chirped for positive 6 and down-chirped for negative b.

A cascade of two chirp filters with coefficients b; and 65 is equivalent to a single
chirp filter with coefficient b = В: + bo, since the transfer functions multiply. Thus,
a down-chirping filter may compensate the effect of an up-chirping filter, so that the
action of a chirp filter is reversible.

Ulf) Vel)
0 у 0 у

(a) Ideal filter (b) Chirp filter
Figure 23.2-2 Magnitude and phase of the envelope transfer functions for (a) an ideal filter, and
(b) a chirp filter (with b > 0).
As can be seen by substituting (23.2-7) into (23.2-4), the pulse envelopes at the output
and input of a chirp filter are related by

Ao(t) = —— A, (t') exp |3-——— | dt’. 23.2-8

= He | Auttvex |i 032-8)
This transformation is mathematically similar to Fresnel diffraction [see (4.3-12) in
Sec. 4.3B], and for a sufficiently large chirp parameter b it becomes similar to Fraun-
hofer diffraction, i.e., equivalent to a Fourier transform (see Sec. 4.3A). The analogy
between diffraction in space and dispersion in time, which is described by a chirp filter,
is formally established in Sec. 23.3D.
Approximation of Arbitrary Phase Filter by a Chirp Filter
When the filter magnitude and phase vary slowly within the narrow spectral width of
a pulse, we may assume that the magnitude is approximately constant at its central-
frequency value, |H(vp + f)| = |H(vo)| = |Ho|, and expand the phase function Ф(и)
in a Taylor series centered at the frequency м. Retaining only the first three terms,
Uo + Л) = Vo + Wf + WU" f?, where Фо = V(r), $ = аФ/а и,” =
PW /dv|,., we obtain H(vp + f) = |Ho| exp[—j (Uo + Wf + 5 WU" 2).

23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION ‘1091

It follows from (23.2-3) that the envelope transfer function may therefore be ap-
proximated by

H.(f) = |Hol exp [—j(Wo + Wf +14" [2]. (23.2-9)
This filter is equivalent to a cascade of an ideal filter and a chirp filter (see Fig. 23.2-
3). The ideal filter is composed of a constant multiplier Ho = |Ho|exp(—jWo),
which does not alter the shape of the pulse and may be ignored, and a phase shift
exp(—j2a7Taf), which is equivalent to a time delay
та = W'/2n. (23.2-10)
Group Delay
The chirp filter has a transfer function exp (—707? f”) with chirp coefficient
wy"
=>. (23.2-11)
2 Chirp Coefficient
Фе) 1\------50
0 f
Arbitrary filter Ideal filter Chirp filter
Figure 23.2-3 Approximation of an arbitrary filter with slowly varying transfer function as a
cascade of an ideal filter (including a time delay) and a chirp filter.

We conclude that the principal source of distortion in a dispersive system with
slowly varying phase is described by a chirp filter. Examples of such systems based
on angular dispersion and Bragg gratings are considered subsequently in this section.
Dispersive media are also described by chirp filters, as will be shown in Sec. 23.3.
A more accurate approximation of the phase filter would require the inclusion of
additional terms in the Taylor-series expansion of the phase U(v). The third-order term
corresponds to a phase filter exp(—j au” 13), and higher-order terms can be similarly
defined.

Chirp Filtering of a Transform-Limited Gaussian Pulse
We now consider the effect of a chirp filter with a transfer function given by Н.(}) =
exp (—jbx? f?) and chirp coefficient b on an unchirped (transform-limited) Gaussian
pulse of complex envelope A;(t) = Ajo exp(—t?/77). Since the Fourier transform
of Ал (Е) is Ai(f) = (Ают/2/т) ехр(—л? т? f?), by virtue of (23.2-2) the filtered
pulse has a complex envelope with Fourier transform

Aa(f) = Аю Е ехр[-л? (п? + №). (23.2-12)

1092 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
This expression may be cast as the Fourier transform of a chirped Gaussian pulse of
width то and chirp parameter a2, which, in accordance with (23.1-18), has a Fourier
transform
2,2 £2
72 пт}
Ao(f) = Ао exp (-725) . (23.2-13)
olf) = Ar 2,/m(1 — jaz) 1 — jaz
Equating the exponents in (23.2-12) and (23.2-13), we obtain
72
=, (23.2-14)
1 — jag
and equating the amplitudes we obtain А = АТ — jag 7/72. Equating the real
and imaginary parts of (23.2-14) leads to the expressions that relate the parameters of
the output pulse to those of the input pulse:
Width п = 7%4/1+06?/rH, (23.2-15)
Chirp parameter ay = b/77, (23.2-16)
A
Amplitude Ао = ———2.—.. (23.2-17)
\/1+ jb/7?
We conclude that upon transmission through a chirp filter, an unchirped Gaussian
pulse remains Gaussian and its properties are modified as follows:
= The pulse width is increased by a factor \/1 + a} = \/1+4 02/7}. For |b] = 7?,
this factor is \/2. Thus, the filter begins to have a significant effect when its chirp
coefficient is of the order of the squared width of the original pulse. For |b| >> тг,
1.е., for large chirp coefficient or narrow original pulse, то ~ |b|/71, indicating
that the width of the filtered pulse is directly proportional to |b] and inversely
proportional to 71, so that narrower pulses undergo greater broadening.
= The initially transform-limited pulse becomes chirped with a chirp parameter a2
that is directly proportional to the filter chirp coefficient 6 and inversely propor-
tional to the square of the original pulse width. The filtered pulse will be up-
chirped if 6 is positive, i.e., if the filter is up-chirping, and will be down-chirped
if b is negative, 1.е., the filter is down-chirping. For b = 77, the chirp parameter
ag = 1.
= The spectral width of the pulse remains unchanged. The original pulse has a
spectral width Av = 0.375/7,, and the filtered pulse has an equal spectral width
(0.375/T2)\/1 + а5 = 0.375/7, = Av. This is not surprising since the chirp
filter is a phase filter that does not alter the spectral intensity of the original pulse.
The invariance of the spectral width may also be viewed as follows: The temporal
width of the pulse is expanded by a factor \/1 + a3, so that the associated spectral
width must be compressed by the same factor. However, because the filtered pulse
is chirped this is accompanied by a spectral broadening by the very same factor,
resulting in an unchanged spectral width.
The dependence of the pulse broadening ratio 72/7, and the chirp parameter az on the
ratio b/7? is illustrated in Fig. 23.2-4.

23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION — 1093
T/T
Poff
т mpm 7 SX | | | ИИ
Nae eee
г р р
pf PN P|
op _ | | Sir | [|
4 92
ag?
Chirp filter b 2 Е
0
85-2
Y
2. 0 1 2 БП
Figure 23.2-4 A chirp filter with coefficient 6 converts an unchirped Gaussian pulse of width 7,
marked by an open circle, into a chirped Gaussian pulse of width 72 and chirp parameter a2. The
pulse width increases as |b| increases, and is greater for smaller 7, . The chirp parameter is directly
proportional to В and is greater for smaller ту.
Chirp Filtering of a Chirped Gaussian Pulse
When a chirped Gaussian pulse is transmitted through a chirp filter, the outcome is also
a chirped Gaussian pulse, with altered parameters. The pulse will be either expanded or
compressed and its chirp parameter will be altered, and may under certain conditions
diminish to zero so that the new pulse may become unchirped (transform limited). This
compression property offers a technique for generation of picosecond and femtosecond
optical pulses, as will be shown in subsequent sections.

If the original pulse has width 7,, chirp parameter ал, and complex envelope
A(t) = Ашехр[-(1 — jai)t?/7?], then upon filtering with a chirp filter H.(f) =
exp (—jbn?f?), the result is a chirped Gaussian pulse A2(t) = Ago exp[—(1 —
jag)t?/73]|, where > >

т. т.
ЕЛ. (23.2-18)
1 - Jaz 1 — ja,
Equating the real and imaginary parts of (23.2-18) leads to the following expressions
for the width 7, and chirp parameter ag:
b 9, 0?
T2 = T14/1 + 2a,5 + 1-+а)-т, (23.2-19)
TI п
6
ag =a, + (1+ а) (23.2-20)
1

A sketch of the dependence of the pulse broadening ratio 72/7, and the chirp pa-
rameter a on the ratio b/ т? is shown in Fig. 23.2-5. To determine the value 0,,,;,, of the
filter’s chirp parameter at which the filtered pulse has its minimum width то, we equate
to zero the derivative of то in (23.2-19) with respect to b. The result is

. . т
Minimum width 7) = ———., (23.2-21)
Vlt+ ay
; . 2 2
Chirp coefficient Dyin = —а1то = 5. (23.2-22)
1+ а

1094 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
Using (23.2-21) and (23.2-22) we rewrite (23.2-19) and (23.2-20) in terms of b,,;,, and
To as follows:
Width т =70,/1+(b— Doin)? / та ; (23.2-23)
Chirp parameter а> = (0 —6,„„)/то. (23.2-24)
When 6 = 6, (23.2-23) and (23.2-24) give то = то and az = 0, so that the pulse is
both maximally compressed and unchirped. Based on (23.2-22), if the original pulse
is up-chirped (a; > 0), then 0,,;,, < 0, so that a down-chirping filter is necessary for
maximal compression. If the original pulse is unchirped (a; = 0), no chirp filter can
compress it further, since it is already at its minimum width (6,,;,, = 0 and 7 = 71).
Note that (23.2-23) and (23.2-24) are identical to (23.2-15) and (23.2-16), which
were derived for the initially unchirped pulse, except that 6 is replaced by b—0,,;,. Thus,
the graphs in Fig. 23.2-4 also apply to the case of an initially chirped pulse except for
a shift in the horizontal direction by the value b,,;,,, as determined from (23.2-22).
EXAMPLE 23.2-1. Compression/Expansion of a Chirped Pulse Using a Chirp Filter.
(a) A Gaussian pulse of width т: and negative chirp parameter a; = —1 is filtered by a chirp filter
of coefficient b. The filtered pulse is also Gaussian and has width 72 and chirp parameter ag. In
this case, the filtered pulse becomes maximally compressed and unchirped when b = bain = aT
and the compression factor is \/1 + a? = \2, so that the compressed pulse width то = 7,/V2.
The normalized pulse width 72/7 is plotted in Fig. 23.2-5(a) versus the ratio b/7¢. For small
positive values of b, the pulse is compressed and acquires positive chirp. It becomes maximally
compressed (and unchirped) when b/7? = 1 (.е., Б/т? = 0.5). As b increases further, the pulse
is expanded. For negative 6, the pulse is expanded and acquires additional down-chirp.
(b) An initially up-chirped pulse with chirp parameter a; = 1 is expanded with the application of an
up-chirping filter (6 > 0); its chirp parameter a2 > 1. Application of a down-chirping filter (b <
0) results in compression. Maximal compression is achieved at b/7 = —1 (or b/t? = —0.5), as
illustrated in Fig. 23.2-5(6).
T2/T0 T/T
Nee ГЕИ |
2 | NM] ОО ПО mn | | | |
\ ЕР | О ОИ О ОИ ПО ОИ
ПО | | | ОО Lf ff ft ПО
ot ft | | Tf op tt ft [ |
2 2
a ay
0 0
2 —2
о Е 2 Бр 2 -1 0 | 2
(а) (5)
Figure 23.2-5 Filtering a Gaussian pulse of width 7, and chirp parameter a, with a chirp filter
of chirp coefficient b, which is positive/negative in the unshaded/shaded areas. Two values of the
original chirp parameter are considered: (a) a, = —1, and (5) a, = 1. The filtered pulse has width
т2 and chirp parameter a2. Parameters of the original pulse (b = 0) are indicated by open circles.
The minimum pulse width 7) = 7, /\/1 + a? is used for normalization. The upper graphs show the
dependence of the normalized pulse width on the ratio b/7?. The lower graphs show the dependence
of the chirp parameter а> on 6/72.

23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION 1095
EXAMPLE 23.2-2. Chirped-Pulse Amplification (CPA). The amplification of an ultra-
short high-peak-power optical pulse is often limited by nonlinear effects such as saturation and self-
focusing in the optical amplifier. Such limitations may be alleviated if the pulse is stretched by use
of a chirp filter prior to amplification, and compressed by filtering through a second chirp filter after
it has been amplified, as illustrated in Fig. 23.2-6. The first filter lowers the peak power by stretching
the pulse, while maintaining its total energy. The second chirp filter, which has a chirp parameter of
equal magnitude and opposite sign, compresses the pulse back to its original width. The amplification
process is distributed over a longer time duration so that the peak power does not exceed the amplifier
limits.
Chirp filter b > 0 Amplifier Chirp filter b < 0 |
Figure 23.2-6 Chirped-pulse amplifier.

EXAMPLE 23.2-3. Ultrafast, Petawatt, High-Repetition-Rate Laser Using CPA. The
HAPLS laser system’ makes use of chirped-pulse amplification to generate ultrafast, high-power
pulses at a central wavelength of 800 nm and a repetition rate of 10 pulses/s. Each pulse delivers
an energy of 30 J in a duration of 30 fs, corresponding to a peak power of 1 PW. The 17-m-
long system comprises а frequency-doubled, diode-pumped Nd*+:glass laser, which in turn serves
as the pump for a Ti?*+:sapphire femtosecond laser (Sec. 16.3) that incorporates a chirped-pulse
amplifier (Example 23.2-2). The power-amplifier portion of the pump laser contains a collection of
Nd?*: glass laser-amplifier slabs similar to those used at the National Ignition Facility (Sec. 15.3B).
The slabs are pumped by four AlGaAs laser-diode stacks (Sec. 18.4A) (comprising > 500000 laser
diodes) that collectively deliver 1000-J pulses of 0.3-ms duration, at a wavelength of 888 nm and
at a repetition rate of 10 pulses/s, with a peak power of 3.2 MW and an average power of 10 kW.
This high repetition rate is enabled by laser-diode pumping, which is a factor of 20 more efficient
than flashlamp pumping and thus reduces heating considerably. The Nd**:glass pump laser produces
200-J pulses at a repetition rate of 10 pulses/s, with an average power of 2 kW, at a wavelength of
1.053 um. After passage through a second-harmonic-generation (SHG) module (Sec. 22.2A), which
halves the wavelength to 526.5 nm, the pulse train pumps the Ti?+:sapphire femtosecond laser that
incorporates chirped-pulse amplification using a diffraction-grating chirp filter for pulse compression
(Example 23.2-5). The net result is that the 1000-J, 3.2-MW pulses of 0.3-ms duration delivered by
the laser-diode stacks are converted into 30-J, 1-PW pulses of 30-fs duration, at the same repetition
rate of 10 pulses/s. The 10-kW average optical power generated by the laser-diode stacks is reduced
to 300 W at the output of the HAPLS, providing an optical-to-optical efficiency n, = 3%. Since the
HAPLS consumes 150 kW of electrical power, its wall-plug efficiency 7. ~ 0.2%. Multi-petawatt
systems generally fall into two classes: 1) those with pulse durations < 50 fs that are principally
based on Ti?+-doped sapphire lasers; and 2) those with pulse durations > 100 fs that are principally
based оп Nd?*- and Yb?*-doped glass or crystals (see, e.g., Example 15.3-1).
ини |
В. Implementations of Chirp Filters
Chip filters are implemented by use of dispersive optical systems. The following are
some of the various origins of dispersion in optical components (see also Sec. 10.3B):

1 The High-Repetition-Rate Advanced Petawatt Laser System (HAPLS), developed at LLNL, is located at the
European Extreme Light Infrastructure (ELI) Beamlines facility in Dolni Brezany, Czech Republic.

1096 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

= Material dispersion results from the frequency/wavelength dependence of the

index of refraction and/or absorption coefficient of optical materials.

= Spatial dispersion takes a variety of forms:

— Angular dispersion has its origin at the frequency/wavelength dependence of
the deflection angle of certain optical components. This is most pronounced
in diffractive optical elements such as diffraction gratings and holographic
optical elements. Refractive elements such as prisms exhibit angular disper-
sion as a result of their material dispersion.

— Multipath dispersion is associated with the existence of multiple paths with
different optical pathlengths. An example is modal dispersion in optical
waveguides, which results from the different propagation constants of the
waveguide modes (Sec. 9.2).

— Optical systems dominated by interferometric effects are wavelength depen-
dent and therefore exhibit interferometric dispersion. For example, strati-
fied media and periodic structures such as Bragg gratings have frequency-
dependent reflectance and transmittance. Optical resonators have strong fre-
quency selectivity, and are therefore highly dispersive.

— Likewise, diffraction from small apertures is wavelength dependent and can
therefore be responsible for significant changes in the profiles of short op-
tical pulses; this is a form of diffractive dispersion. In general, propaga-
tion through, or scattering from, spatial structures or inhomogeneities of
size comparable to a wavelength contribute to this type of dispersion. Even
single-mode waveguides exhibit waveguide dispersion, which is associated
with the confinement of light in small structures (see Sec. 9.2).

= Polarization dispersion is a result of the wavelength dependence of the anisotropic

properties of optical materials, components, and systems.

= Nonlinear dispersion also plays an important role in the reshaping of intense

optical pulses, because of the wavelength dependence of nonlinear optical effects
such as self-phase modulation and parametric interactions governed by frequency-
dependent energy conservation and phase-matching conditions.

Any of these dispersive effects may be used to implement the chirp filter, as demon-
strated by the following examples.

Angular-Dispersion Chirp Filters
Optical elements that introduce angular dispersion, such as prisms and diffraction
gratings, may function as chirp filters. A generic element with such behavior, illustrated
schematically in Fig. 23.2-7(a), disperses the monochromatic components that consti-
tute a pulsed plane wave into different directions. Assume that the component with
frequency и is directed at an angle 0(v) measured from the direction of the component
at the central frequency 1, i.e., 9(vo) = 0. If 60 is the optical pathlength of the central-
frequency component, then the optical pathlength of the component at frequency v is
fo cos @(v), as can be seen from Fig. 23.2-7(a). The phase shift encountered by the
spectral component v is
2пи

Vv) = — eo cos O(v), (23.2-25)
and the corresponding phase filter has a transfer function H(v) = exp[—j V(v)].

A pulsed beam is typically filtered by use of four identical dispersive elements
arranged as shown in Fig. 23.2-7(b). One element separates the spectral components
of the optical pulse into separate directions. A second inverted element brings back the
rays into parallelism, as illustrated in the left block of Fig. 23.2-7(b). The process is
reversed by two identical elements in the reverse order, as illustrated in the right block

23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION 1097
of the figure. The overall system is a phase filter with Ф(и) = (271/c)lp cos A(v),
where 60 is the overall optical pathlength of the central-frequency component.
ь Original A Х Filtered
[ 4 cos 9 P pulse pulse
0 4 Wy, Vi м X
0 yO
(a) (b) Chirp Filter
Figure 23.2-7 (a) An optical element exhibiting angular dispersion. The component at frequency
и is separated from that at the central frequency хо by a deflection angle @(v). At the observation
point Ро, the pathlength of the central-frequency component is 4% (distance РРо). The pathlength
of the component at frequency и is the distance PP, where P; is determined by lining up the
wavefront to pass through the observation point Po. Therefore, the distance PP; in the triangle PP; Po
is бо cos 0(v). (b) A chirp filter made with a combination of four of the elements in (a).

The function @(v) depends on the dispersive element used, as will be shown in
subsequent examples. Typically, 0(v) is sufficiently small so that соз0(и) = 1 —
36°(v) and

_ anv 112
If 0(v) is slowly varying within the pulse spectral width, then it may be approximated
by a few terms of a Taylor-series expansion about the central frequency шо. The deriva-
tives of U(v) evaluated at и = м, where 9(м) = 0, are:
Qn 2ти, (d0\”
Раб, Ws —-—fy (F) . (23.2-27)
с с dv
Based on (23.2-10) and (23.2-11), the filter is equivalent to a time delay Ty = в/с
and a chirp filter with chirp coefficient
br — a2, (23.2-28)
To Angular-Dispersion Chirp Coefficient
where a, = d6/dv is the angular dispersion coefficient. Since 6 is always negative in
this approximation, regardless of the sign of a,,, such filters are always down-chirping.
Higher-order terms of the series expansion of the phase do, of course, introduce addi-
tional pulse shaping effects.
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 23.2-4. Prism Chirp Filter. The angle of deflection 64(v) of а ray incident оп а
prism is a function of the refraction geometry and the refractive index (и) (see Fig. 23.2-8). Since
O(v) = Oa(v) — Aq(vo) the angular dispersion coefficient a, = d0/dv = (d@a/dn)(dn/dv). Using
the relations dn/dv = —(A,/M)dn/dr, = (п — N)/u, where № = п — Аоап/АЛь is the group
index of the material (see Sec. 5.7), we obtain
—N
a, = DON dea (23.2-29)
Yo dn

1098 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
For a thin prism with apex angle a, the deflection angle 0, = (п — 1)a [see (1.2-7)] so that ада /dn
= а and
—N
ета. (23.2-30)
Vo
As an example, for BK7 glass at wavelength A, = 800 nm, п = 1.511 and М = 1.527. For a prism
with а = 15°, a, = —1.11 x 107!” = —0.011 fs. For 6% = 1 т, the chirp coefficient given by (23.2-
28) is b = —a?(n — №)? А,/тс? = —5 x 10-29 $2 & — (7.1 fs)?. In accordance with (23.2-15)
and (23.2-16), an unchirped pulse of width 7, = 5 fs transmitted through this device is broadened by
a factor (1 + b?/7#)!/? = 2.23 and becomes chirped with chirp parameter ay = b/7? = 2.
The thick-prism chirp filter is considered in Prob. 23.2-1.
Original Zp Ss Filtered
pulse pulse
и
iy
Figure 23.2-8 Prism chirp filter.
EXAMPLE 23.2-5. Diffraction-Grating Chirp Filter. In a diffraction grating system
(Fig. 23.2-9) the angles of incidence and diffraction, 6, and 95, from a grating with period A
are related by the diffraction condition (2.4-13). If 05 = 055 + O(v), where 29 is the angle of the
central-frequency component, then for first-order diffraction,
. . А с
sin 0, + [950 + A(v)] = АРА: (23.2-31)
Taking the derivatives of both sides at v = мо, we obtain
dé —с —r
y= — = SO = 23.2-32
° Чи véAcosO2 — cAcos O29 ( )
In the symmetrical case in which 6; = 09, sin 029 = A, /2A, and therefore
1 Xo
Qa, = -— (23.2-33)
Yo \/A? — (Л /2)2
so that
Лобо №2
b= —- 2 23.2-34
пс? A? — (A,/2)? ( )
For Ло = 800 nm and A = 1.6 pm, a, = —2.72 x 10718 s = —2.72 fs. For 2) = 10 cm, b =
—2.94 x 10-25 = —(542 fs).
Original Filtered
pulse pulse
Figure 23.2-9 The diffraction grating as a down-chirping filter.

23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION 1099
Bragg-Grating Chirp Filters
Variable-pitch (or chirped) Bragg gratings (Fig. 23.2-10) are often used as chirp fil-
ters. As described in Sec. 7.1C, a Bragg grating is a periodic structure that reflects
optical waves selectively. A grating with period A reflects only waves with wave-
length satisfying the Bragg condition A = mA/2, where m is an integer; waves
at other wavelengths are transmitted without change. The grating can therefore serve
as a narrowband filter. If the grating has a pitch that varies with position, then each
segment of the grating reflects the wave with a wavelength matching the local pitch.
The reflected waves travel different distances depending on the location from which
they are reflected, so that the system acts as a frequency-sensitive phase filter. If the
frequency of the periodic structure varies linearly with distance, the grating is said to
be linearly chirped, and it functions as a linear chirp filter.
A(z)
Figure 23.2-10 A Bragg grating with
decreasing period serves as a positive
chirp filter.
0 а 2
Assume that the period of a Bragg grating is a function A(z) of the position 2
selected such that the frequency varies linearly with z, 1.е., A~'(z) = A>! + &2 where
Ло is the period at = = 0 and € is a constant. To determine the effect of the grating on
an optical pulse, we decompose the pulse into its spectral components and examine the
effect of the grating on each component. The component of frequency v is reflected
from the grating at the location z for which A = тА/2, 1.е., A(z) = mA/2 = mc/2v
or z = 2и/тсё — 1/€A,. That component travels a distance 2z and undergoes a phase
shift Ф = (27v/c)(2z) so that
W = (8 /тс?Е)и? + (4m /c& No) к. (23.2-35)
It follows from (23.2-10) and (23.2-11) that the chirped Bragg grating is equivalent to
atime delay тд = 2/c€A, and a chirp filter with chirp coefficient
8
b= ——,. (23.2-36)
тлёс Bragg-Grating Chirp Coefficient
If € > 0, 1.е., the grating has an increasing frequency, as illustrated in Fig. 23.2-10,
and the chirp coefficient b > 0, 1.е., the filter is up-chirping. Likewise, a chirped Bragg
grating with a decreasing frequency is a down-chirping filter.
C. Pulse Compression
A transform-limited pulse cannot be compressed by use of a chirp filter alone. Such a
filter introduces chirp accompanied by temporal broadening, but it does not alter the
spectral width of the pulse. However, compression may be achieved by making use of
a phase modulator followed by a chirp filter. The phase modulator multiplies the pulse
by a time-dependent phase factor, which introduces chirp accompanied by spectral
broadening, but it does not alter the temporal width of the pulse. The chirped pulse

1100 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

is subsequently compressed by a chirp filter, which preserves the broadened spectral
width while compressing the temporal width in the course of generating a transform-
limited compressed pulse.

To compress an unchirped pulse A(t) = Ao exp(—t?/7?), we first convert it into
a chirped pulse by multiplication with a quadratic phase factor exp(j¢t?), where С is
a constant, using a quadratic phase modulator (QPM). The result is a chirped pulse
Ax (t) = Aio exp[—(1 — jaz)t?/77?] with chirp parameter

a, = Cr. (23.2-37)
If ¢ > 0, the pulse becomes up-chirped, and subsequent filtering with a down-chirping
filter can result in compression. Alternatively, if ¢ < 0, the pulse becomes down-
chirped and subsequent filtering with an up-chirping filter can result in compression.
In either case, the pulse is compressed by a factor \/1 + af = \/1 + ¢?7}. The system
is illustrated in Fig. 23.2-11.
QPM Chirp filter
op 2 2
elbuf
x
Transform- Chirped Compressed
limited > pulse transform-limited
pulse els! | ЕВ, = фа /(1+а1) pulse

Pulse width: т т т= т, /Ул+а?

Chirp parameter: 0 a = 67 0

Spectral width: Av Av 1+a4 Av/1+a2
Figure 23.2-11 Compression of a transform-limited pulse by use of a quadratic phase modulator
(QPM) followed by a chirp filter.

If the original pulse is a chirped pulse А1(#) = Ajo exp[—(1 — ja1)t?/7?], then
modulation by a quadratic phase ехр(7СЁ) converts it into another chirped pulse
Ao(t) = Aro exp[—(1 — jaz)t?/7?] with the same width but with an altered chirp
parameter

ay = a, + Ст. (23.2-38)

Effect of QPM

on Chirp Parameter

Thus, a quadratic phase modulator for which the sign of С is opposite to that of a, may
unchirp the initial pulse or even reverse its chirp sign.

Summary

The quadratic phase modulator (QPM) and the chirp filter serve dual functions.

One operation is the Fourier-transform analog of the other:

QPM | — п НО Ey a Alters spectral width Preserves temporal width
quadratic phase function:

Chirp | = convolution with a . .

Filia: | quadentic tress Prneilene Preserves spectral width | Alters temporal width

23.2 PULSE SHAPING AND COMPRESSION 1101

QPMs may be implemented by use of electro-optic modulators (see Sec. 21.1B),
although the production of the appropriate signal exp(j¢t) is not simple. Passive
phase modulation occurs when intense pulses are transmitted through nonlinear media
exhibiting the optical Kerr effect, as will be described in Sec. 23.5C in connection with
self-phase modulation, and this effect may be used to implement QPMs.

D. Pulse Shaping
The pulse-shaping methods discussed thus far are based on chirp filters implemented
by dispersive optical components. Though chirp filters can be used for the purposes of
pulse stretching and compression, they cannot be used to alter the optical pulse shape in
an arbitrary manner, nor can they be used to generate optical pulses of prescribed shape,
as is often desired in optical-communications and signal-processing applications. The
general shaping of ultrashort pulses can, however, be achieved by making use of optical
frequency-to-space mapping or time-to-space mapping, together with the use of spatial
light modulators, as described in this section.
Frequency-to-Space Mapping
Frequency-to-space mapping of an optical pulse is achieved by means of a diffraction
grating and a lens, which direct each constituent spectral component to a unique point
in the lens’s focal plane, as illustrated in the left side of Fig. 23.2-12. This system
in effect projects the Fourier transform of the temporal profile of the pulse as a spatial
pattern in the focal plane. A modulator modifies the magnitude and phase in accordance
with the transfer function of the desired pulse-shaping linear filter. This is accom-
plished by use of a microlithographic or holographic mask, or a programmable spatial
light modulator (SLM) (see Sec. 21.3B). The inverse operation of spatial-spectral
mapping is subsequently implemented by a second lens and grating, which recombine
the modified spectral components to form the reshaped pulse. This amounts to an
inverse Fourier transform, and the overall operation is similar to spatial filtering in
Fourier optics (see Sec. 4.4B). This technique has become an established tool for the
general shaping of ultrashort pulses.
= f f f—
Grating | 29 Lens Lg SLM Jad Lens | Grating
у | Original x Focal Filtered
pulse plane pulse
t t
Figure 23.2-12 A system for pulse shaping includes: (1) frequency-to-space mapping — a grating
and a lens display the Fourier transform of the pulse as a spatial pattern in the Fourier plane; (2)
modulation by a spatial light modulator (SLM); and (3) space-to-frequency mapping using a lens and
a grating generating the inverse Fourier transform.

The system depicted in Fig. 23.2-12 is described quantitatively as follows. If 6(v)
is the deflection angle introduced by the grating at frequency v, then the Fourier
component at that frequency will be focused at a position x = 6(v)f in the lens focal
plane (the Fourier plane), where jf is the lens focal length and the angle is assumed to
be small. A mask with amplitude transmittance p(x) is therefore equivalent to a filter
with transfer function H(v) = p[6(v)f]. If 0(v) is approximated by a linear function

1102 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
of frequency, 0(v) = арм, where a, = d6/dv is the angular dispersion coefficient of
the grating [given by (23.2-32)], then the shape of the filter transfer function H(v) is a
scaled version of the profile of the mask function p(x), 1.е.,

H(v) = p(a, fv). (23.2-39)
In this frequency-to-space mapping, the position x in the Fourier plane corresponds
to the frequency и = x/a,f, and the spectral width Av extends over a width Х =
ay fAv.

The preceding simplified analysis was based on the assumption that the original
pulse is a plane wave, so that diffraction plays no role. For an original beam of finite
width W in the plane of the grating, the spectral component at frequency v is deflected
by an angle 9(и) = a,v, but has an angular spread proportional to \/W = c/vW,
which corresponds to a spatial spread 62 = fAo/W = cf/vW. This frequency-
dependent spread limits the spatial resolution of the system. A mask of total width
X has approximately М = Х/дх = X/(Aof/W) independent points, where Xo is
the central wavelength. The spatial spread dx corresponds to a spectral spread dv =
(Aof /W)/(avf) = Ло/ (а, И’). This limits the spectral resolution of the pulse filtering
system to М = XW/Aof independent points.

The reshaping of picosecond and femtosecond pulses has been successfully demon-
strated using a number of SLM technologies, including deformable mirrors, multi-
element liquid-crystal modulator arrays (millisecond to submillisecond response times,
high duty cycle), acousto-optic deflectors (microsecond reprogramming, low duty cy-
cle), and semiconductor optoelectronic modulator arrays (nanosecond reprogramming
times).

Time-to-Space Mapping
Another configuration for arbitrary pulse shaping uses a spatial light modulator (SLM)
butted against a diffraction grating and followed by a 2-f lens system with an оп-
axis pinhole in the Fourier plane, as illustrated in Fig. 23.2-13. The grating multiplies
the spectral component of frequency и, which has complex envelope A;(v), by the
frequency-dependent and position-dependent phase factor exp(j2m7yvx), where 7+ is
a constant. The SLM modulates it by a controllable spatial pattern p(a), and the lens
system functions as a spatial integrator producing an amplitude

Ao(v) «x Ai(v) [oo exp(j2myvx) ах x Ai(v)P(—yv), (23.2-40)
where P(v,,) is the spatial Fourier transform of p(2:). The overall system therefore acts
as a linear system with transfer function H(v) « P(—7yv), which corresponds to an
impulse response function

h(t) x p(—t/7). (23.2-41)
It follows that the transmittance of the SLM at the position x controls the value of the
impulse response function at one-and-only-one time t = —yx. Thus, the system serves
as a direct time-to-space mapping that may be exploited to reshape or synthesize a
femtosecond pulse with arbitrary temporal profile.
23.3 PULSE PROPAGATION IN OPTICAL FIBERS

This section examines the propagation of an optical pulse in an extended linear dis-
persive medium, such as an optical fiber, by regarding the process of propagation as a

23.3 PULSE PROPAGATION IN OPTICAL FIBERS 1103
D(X) т | 7 1 Filtered
Original Я | LA pulse
"lf 4
Xx
SLM Grating Lens

Figure 23.2-13 Pulse shaping based on time-to-space mapping. The system has an impulse
response function h(t) that is a scaled version of the SLM transmittance function p().
linear filter with a transfer function governed by the frequency-dependent propagation
constant. For optical pulses with a slowly varying envelope, such as picosecond pulses,
the filter may be approximated by a combination of a time delay and a chirp filter,
in which case the mathematics of pulse propagation is encompassed in the analysis
provided in Sec. 23.2A. A differential equation describing the evolution of the pulse
envelope as it travels through the medium is derived and an analogy between dispersion
and ordinary optical diffraction is established.
A. The Optical Fiber as a Chirp Filter
The Dispersive Medium as a Filter
Upon propagation in a linear lossless dispersive medium, a monochromatic plane wave
of frequency v traveling a distance z in the z direction (Fig. 23.3-1) undergoes a phase
shift G(v)z, where В(и) = типы) /сь is the propagation constant, and n(v) is the
refractive index. Propagation is therefore mathematically equivalent to multiplication
by the phase factor exp|—j6(v)z]. Since a pulsed wave of wavefunction U(z, t) is a
superposition of many monochromatic waves, the phase factor H(v) = exp[—73(v)z]
is the transfer function of the linear system that represents propagation, i.e., V(z,v) =
H(v)V(0,v) = exp|—jG(v)z] V(0,v), where V(z,v) is the Fourier transform of
U(z,t).

For pulses with narrow spectral distribution, the complex wavefunction is writ-
ten in terms of the complex envelope, U(z,t) = A(z,t) exp(—jGoz) exp(j2mvot),
where Vv is the central frequency and Во = ((vo). In the Fourier domain, this trans-
lates to V(z,v) = A(z,v — v9) exp(—jGoz), and hence the relation V(z,v) =
exp [—j8(v)z] У (0, и) becomes A(z, и- м) = A(0, v—v9) exp(—J[8(v) — B(vo)]z).
In terms of the frequency difference f = v — 1,

A(z, f) = H.(f)A(0, Л), (23.3-1)
where
He(f) = exp {=ЛВ(ш + Л) — Bo) 2} (23.3-2)
Envelope Transfer Function
is the envelope transfer function.The effect of the dispersive medium on the pulse
envelope is therefore modeled as a phase filter Н.(}) = exp[—jW(f)] with phase
U(f) = [В(щ + Л) — Bo) ]z-

1104 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
Dispersive medium
0 Z Не)
м м
О, A(z, 0) т

ov / " 57 , a t
Figure 23.3-1 Transmission of an optical pulse through a dispersive medium is equivalent to a
phase filter.
Approximation of a Dispersive Medium by Time Delay and Chirp Filter
If the propagation constant В (и) varies slowly within the pulse spectral width, we may
use the results of the Taylor-series expansion U(f) = W’f + sw” f?, described in
Sec. 23.2A, where W’ and ©” are the first and second derivatives of Ф (и) with respect
to v at 1, and Ф(0) = 0. The envelope transfer function can then be approximated by

H.(f) = exp[—j(W' f + 1" f?)| = exp(—j2mtaf) exp(—jbm’f?), — (23.3-3)

where Tg = W’/27 and b = W"/27. It follows that the process of pulse propagation
is equivalent to a combination of a time delay and a chirp filter.

The factor exp(—j2m7uf) is a time delay та = W’/2r = (1/27)(dG/dv)z =
(d8/dw)z = z/v, called the group delay, where

1 Со
N Group Velocity
(8' = dB/dw)
is the group velocity, and № = п — Лоап/АЛь is the group index. These parameters
have been previously defined in the simplified analysis provided in Sec. 5.7.

The factor exp(—jbr?f”) represents a chirp filter with chirp coefficient b =
W" /2n? = (1/20?) (d?B/dv2)z = 28"z, where В" = d?G/dw?. The chirp coefficient
is proportional to the distance z and is usually written in the form

D
b= 28" = —z, (23.3-5)
п Chirp Coefficient
where
d {1 d3 a?
D, = тв" = — (5) = oo (23.3-6)
dv \uy со dX, GVD Coefficient
(8" = d?B/du*)
is the group velocity dispersion (GVD) coefficient. It is the derivative of the group de-
lay per unit length with respect to the frequency v, as described previously in Sec. 5.7.
A medium with 8” > 0 (or D, > 0) is said to have normal dispersion or positive

23.3 PULSE PROPAGATION IN OPTICAL FIBERS 1105
GVD, and it functions as an up-chirping chirp filter (6 > 0). Conversely, a medium
with В” < 0 (or D, < 0) is said to have anomalous dispersion or negative GVD, and
it corresponds to a down-chirping filter (b < 0).
ПИ
EXAMPLE 23.3-1. Adjustable Chirp Filter Using Combined Angular and Material Dis-
persion т а Prism. In Example 23.2-4, it was shown that when a pulsed beam is refracted by a
prism, a chirping effect is introduced as a result of angular dispersion. In this example, we consider
the effect of material dispersion, which was neglected in the previous example. If the central ray
crossing the prism in Fig. 23.2-8 travels a distance Г, through the prism, then material dispersion
amounts to a chirp filter with chirp coefficient b = 26” L = D,L/7 [see (23.3-5)]. For a prism made
of BK7 glass at Л = 800 nm, the dispersion coefficient D, = 0.284 x 10-24 s?/m so that, for Г = 1 m,
the chirp coefficient b = D, L/m = +9 x 10-26 $? = +(300 fs). In Example 23.2-4, it was shown
that the chirp coefficient arising from angular dispersion alone for a thin prism with 15° apex angle
was b == — (7.1 fs)?. The total chirp coefficient is the sum of the contributions of material and angular
dispersion so the net value of b is positive. The distance Г, can be adjusted by moving the prism in a
direction orthogonal to its base, as illustrated in Fig. 23.3-2.
Figure 23.3-2 Prism chirp filter with adjustable chirp coefficient.

«ПИ

Зиттагу

The propagation of a pulse in a dispersive medium may be approximated by two

effects: a time delay associated with the group velocity v = 1/8’ = c,/N

and а chirp filter with chirp parameter b = 26”; = D,z/7 proportional to

the propagation distance =. The parameters 0’ and В” are the derivatives of the

propagation constant В with respect to the angular frequency w, and D, = 278”

is the GVD coefficient.
B. Propagation of a Gaussian Pulse in an Optical Fiber
Since a linear dispersive medium may be approximated by a time delay and a chirp
filter, the propagation of a Gaussian optical pulse in such a medium may be understood
in terms of the general results presented in Sec. 23.2A, as discussed above.
Transform-Limited-Gaussian Input Pulse
Consider first a transform-limited (unchirped) Gaussian pulse of width то at z = 0. At
a distance z the pulse is delayed by a time тд = z/v and is filtered by a chirp filter
of chirp coefficient b = D,z/z. In accordance with (23.2-15)-(23.2-17), the pulse
remains Gaussian, but its width increases to T(z) = To[1 + (D2/r?7(1)z?]/?, and it
becomes chirped with chirp parameter a(z) = (D,/m7@)z and amplitude Ag(z) =

1106 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

Ao{1 — j(D,/17@)z]~'/?. By defining the parameter zp such that D,/m72 = 1/20,

these equations may be expressed in the simpler forms provided in Table 23.3-1,

which also includes an expression for the complex envelope based on (23.1-12). The

magnitude of 2о is called the dispersion length and is a characteristic of the medium
and the initial pulse width. The following observations emerge:

Table 23.3-1 Characteristics of a Gaussian pulse traveling through a dispersive medium with group

velocity v, dispersion coefficient D,,, and dispersion parameter zo. At z = 0 the pulse is transform-

limited with width то, amplitude Ао, and intensity Го = | Ao|?.

A(z,t) = Aoy/ 10 exp ES (¢= 2/0)" 2/0) Complex envelope (23.3-7)

Z— Jz D, 2-j%
t— 2
I(z,t) = Ip— exp Lo (t= 2/0" Intensity (23.3-8)
T(z) т?(2)

[та = /т/2 Тото Energy density (23.3-9)
T(z) = п\/1 + (2/20)? Pulse width (23.3-10)
a(z) = 2/20 Chirp parameter (23.3-11)

T _ т И
20 = "р, = ов" Dispersion length |zo| (23.3-12)
Av = 9.375 Spectral width (23.3-13)
To

= The pulse center is delayed by a time z/v; 1.е., the pulse travels with the group
velocity v = 1/6".

= The width of the pulse 7(z) has its minimum value то at z = 0 and increases with
increasing |z|, as illustrated in Fig. 23.3-3. At z = |zo| the pulse expands by a fac-
tor of 2, and at z = УЗ |z| its width doubles. For = >> |z0|, T(z) = T2/|z0| =
(|D,|/79)z; 1.е., the pulse expands linearly at a rate inversely proportional to
its initial pulse width, то. In terms of the spectral width Av = 0.375 /т, the
pulse width behaves as T(z) = (1/0.3757) |D,| Av = 0.85|D,| Av z, which
is consistent with the fact that D, is the pulse broadening rate per unit distance
per unit spectral width (s/m-Hz). This relation may also be written in terms of
the dispersion coefficient Дл [ps/km-nm] as T(z) = 0.85 |D)| АЛ 2, which is an
approximate version of (5.7-8).

= The chirp parameter a(z) is О at z = 0, by definition, and increases linearly
with the distance z, reaching a magnitude of unity at z = |20|, as illustrated in
Fig. 23.3-3. The chirp sign is the same as the sign of D,. For normal dispersion,
D, > 0 and a(z) > 0 for > 0, meaning that the pulse is up-chirped. In
the visible region, normal dispersion means that “blue” is slower than “red,”
which is consistent with an up-chirped pulse. The opposite occurs for anomalous
dispersion.

= The dispersion length |zo| depends on the magnitude of the medium dispersion
coefficient D,, and the initial pulse width то. It is the distance at which the pulse
width increases by a factor of \/2 and the chirp parameter reaches a magnitude of
unity.

= The spectral width Ди = 0.375/7) remains the same as the pulse travels. The
spectral compression that accompanies temporal expansion of the pulse is fully
compensated by an equal spectral broadening that accompanies chirping. This is

23.3 PULSE PROPAGATION IN OPTICAL FIBERS 1107
to be expected since propagation in the dispersive medium is modeled as a phase
filter, which does not alter the spectral intensity.

и The energy density carried by the pulse is independent of z, as one would expect
in a lossless medium.
Unchirped pulse Up-chirped pulse
width то width 7(z) R B
ААА
ih Medium with positive GVD
3
a
5? ="
И ПИЯ Figure 23.3-3 | Propagation ог
|| an initially unchirped Gaussian
ТЯ ПО ПО pulse through a dispersive medium.
3 The pulse remains Gaussian, but its
width т(2) expands, and it becomes
= chirped with an increasing chirp
1 parameter a(z).
0
0 т 2 3
ии |
EXAMPLE 23.3-2. Pulse Broadening т BK7 Glass. The dispersion coefficient of BK7
glass at = 620 nm is В” = 1.02 x 10-75 s?/m. For a slab of thickness 1 cm, this corresponds to
a chirp coefficient b = 28"; = 2.04 x 10-23 s?/m = (4.5 ps)”. This means that when a Gaussian
pulse of width 4.5 ps crosses the slab, its width expands by a factor of \/2. For a shorter Gaussian
pulse of time constant то = 100 fs and central wavelength Л.= 620 nm, the dispersion length is
[20| = 72 /2|8’|= 0.5 mm. The pulse doubles its width upon crossing a slab of thickness /3 20 mm
= 0.87 mm.
ини |
Chirped Gaussian Input Pulse
Based on (23.2-21), upon propagation through the dispersive medium a chirped Gaus-
sian pulse of width 7, and chirp parameter a, at z = 0 reaches a minimum width
T
= SS (23.3-14)
vita Minimum Width
at a distance z,,;, for which (D,/7)Zmin = Omine From (23.2-22),
m2
Zmin = — @1 ~-T 23.3-15
1 D, 0; ( )
which may be written in terms of the dispersion parameter 20 = 77) /D, аз
Zmin = —@120. (23.3-16)
Location of Minimum Width

1108 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
Finally (23.2-23) and (23.2-24) translate to the following expressions for the pulse
width and chirp parameter as functions of the distance z,
T(z) = п\/1+ (2 = Zmin)?/ 2); (23.3-17)
a(z) = (2 — Zmin) /20- (23.3-18)
Equations (23.3-17) and (23.3-18) are identical to (23.3-10) and (23.3-11) for the
initially unchirped case, except for a shift by а distance z,,;,, which is the location
of the minimum width.
The expressions in Table 23.3-1 are therefore universally valid for both positive
or negative z and may be used for initially chirped pulses acing the beginnin,
gati d may b d for initially chirped pulses by placing the beginning
of the medium at the location z corresponding to the matching value of the initial
chirp parameter. This is illustrated in Fig. 23.3-4, which is another plot of 7(z) and
a(z) based on (23.3-10) and (23.3-11) for positive and negative values of z. As an
example, for a medium with positive 20 (positive GVD, or normal dispersion), when
the initial chirp parameter is а1 = —1, then z,,;, = 20, so that the medium begins at the
position z = —20. The process of pulse compression and subsequent spreading is now
clear. The pulse is maximally compressed by a factor of \/2 and becomes unchirped
at a distance 2„, = 20. Upon further propagation through the medium the pulse is
broadened and becomes up-chirped.
Down-chirped pulse Unchirped pulse Up-chirped pulse
width т, width то width 7(z)
ie — АЛ
0 ‘<min <
т(<) /то |
ee eee
AS a ОИ ОНИ ОИ
о igure 2334 Propagation of
И м an initially down-chirped Gaussian
it (= 1) trough medi
о wl norma ispersion. е pulse
0 | ^ | | width т(2) decreases from an
a(z) initial value of т, to a minimum
2 т = 1/2, and subsequently
increases. The initially negative
chirp parameter increases linearly
9 and reverses sign when z > Zin In
this example Zin = 20.
—2
-3 —2 —1 0 1 2 5/50
Since the initial chirp parameter a, and the dispersion coefficient D, may be posi-
tive or negative, we have a number of possibilities:

23.3 PULSE PROPAGATION IN OPTICAL FIBERS 1109

= For a medium with normal dispersion (D, > 0) the filter is up-chirping and

the parameter Zo is positive. For an initially down-chirped pulse (a, < 0), 2,

is positive so that the pulse is indeed compressed as it travels in the positive z

direction. For an initially up-chirped pulse (a; > 0), 2, 1$ negative and the pulse
will not be compressed.

= For a medium with anomalous dispersion (D, < 0) the filter is down-chirping

and the parameter zp is negative. For an initially up-chirped pulse (a, > 0), 2min
is positive so that the pulse is indeed compressed as it travels in the positive z
direction. For an initially down-chirped pulse (ал < 0), Zmin 15 negative, so that
the pulse will not be compressed.
In summary, compression can occur if an up-chirped pulse travels through a down-
chirping (anomalous) medium, or if a down-chirped pulse travels through an up-
chirping (normal) medium.
Pulse Compression by Use of a QPM and a Dispersive Medium
As described in Sec. 23.2C, a transform-limited pulse may be compressed by use of a
combination of a quadratic phase modulator (QPM) and a chirp filter. The chirp filter
may be implemented by a dispersive medium, as illustrated in Fig. 23.3-5. If the width
of the initial pulse is ти, then modulation by the phase factor exp(j¢t?) is equivalent
to a chirp coefficient a; = Ст?. The spectral width of the chirped pulse is expanded by
the factor \/1 + a7. If С is negative, the pulse is down-chirped, and subsequent travel
through a medium with positive GVD (normal dispersion) results in pulse compression
to a minimum width
и a (23.3-19)
то = =. .3-
а V1+C7}

The pulse will also be compressed if ¢ is positive and the medium has negative
GVD. Using (23.3-16) and (23.3-19), we conclude that the minimum width occurs at
a distance

2 2 4
TT) п та те п
nin = — = -— a = OD oo 23.3-20
в 10D, Та ры Crt ( )
which is positive if ¢ and D, have opposite signs.
t
ОРМ (>
T(z)
те
oe | Figure 23.3-5 Pulse compression by
33 ~ то ; a quadratic phase modulator (QPM) and
A. и ' a medium with group velocity disper-
о sion (GVD).
' Л <
AUDA:
25
a ay

1110 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
In the limit when a, = Ст? > 1,
T 1
пя = — (23.3-21)
я бп
and Zin © }, where x
f=—. (23.3-22)
— ср и

This distance may be regarded as the focal length of this pulse focusing system.

«ПИ

EXAMPLE 23.3-3. Pulse Compression т a Silica-Glass Optical Fiber.

(a) A Gaussian pulse of time constant т = 100 fs and central wavelength Ло= 850 nm (generated,
e.g., by a Ti-sapphire laser) travels through a silica-glass optical fiber. At this wavelength, silica
glass has normal dispersion (positive GVD) with D, = —200 ps/km-nm (see Fig. 5.7-5), corre-
sponding to О, = —(A2/c,)D, = +4.82 x 10-25 52 / т. If the pulse is initially unchirped, then
то = 100 fs and therefore the dispersion length is 20 = 774 /D, = 6.52 cm. At this distance the
pulse expands by a factor of /2 and has a chirp coefficient a = 1. At a distance = = 6.52 m, the
pulse width increases by a factor of approximately 2/20 = 100, becoming 10 ps and the chirp
parameter a = 100.

(b) If the initial pulse is phase modulated by a factor exp(j¢#?), then a, = Ст?. For ¢ = —10-2 №?
the pulse becomes down-chirped with parameter a = —1. Upon subsequent propagation through
the fiber, the initial 100-fs pulse is compressed to то =100//2 = 77 fs at a distance zi, =
—а120 = 772 /D, = 3.26 cm. Since the pulse is now narrower, it expands more rapidly upon
further propagation through the fiber. At the distance z = 6.52 m, the width increases by a factor
of approximately z/z = 200, reaching a width of 14.1 ps.

«ПИ

ОИ

EXERCISE 23.3-1

Dispersion Compensation т Optical Fibers. Pulse broadening in an optical fiber may be

eliminated by balancing normal and anomalous dispersion.

(a) An unchirped pulse of central wavelength Ло = 1.55 um and width т, = 10 ps is transmitted
through a silica-glass optical fiber. At this wavelength, silica glass has anomalous dispersion with
D) = +20 ps/km-nm. Determine the pulse width т and chirp parameter а at a distance d; = 100
km.

(b) If the pulse is to be compressed back to the original width of 10 ps by use of another fiber of
length 4 (see Fig. 23.3-6) made of some material exhibiting normal dispersion with О» = —100
ps/km-nm, determine 45.

t t t
T(2) т
TI TI Figure 23.3-6 Dispersion compensa-
0 | | tion in optical fibers.
a (2) Ге 941+ <
0 <
—а

23.3 PULSE PROPAGATION IN OPTICAL FIBERS 1111
EXERCISE 23.3-2
Dispersion Compensation by Use of a Periodic Sequence of Phase Modulators.
Pulse broadening in an optical fiber may be reduced by use of a periodic set of quadratic phase
modulators spaced at a distance 24. Each modulator introduces a quadratic phase exp(j¢t?). If the
dispersion coefficient ¢ is positive and the fiber material has negative GVD, then the pulse width
and chirp parameter increase and decrease periodically as illustrated in Fig. 23.3-7. Show that the
condition for this periodic pattern is
2a 2d/z 2D,d
=e 23.3-23
¢ т2 те [1 + (d/z0)?] nrg [1+ (Did/m78)?]’ ( )
where то and т are the minimum and maximum pulse widths, a is the chirp parameter, and
20 = 7172 /D,.
|< 2d __,|
ОО О О ТОО О ООО Я ООО
о ОРМ (+) Ур ОРМ( GYDO QPM() GVDO QPM()
<
п
То
0
<
a(z)
0 <
—а
Figure 23.3-7 Dispersion compensation by use of periodic positive QPM and negative GVD.
НИ
*C. Slowly Varying Envelope Diffusion Equation
It was shown in Sec. 23.3A that a dispersive medium with propagation constant approx-
imated by a Taylor-series expansion up to the quadratic term is equivalent to a pulse-
envelope filter with transfer function H.(f) = exp(—j2rzf/v) exp(—jaD,zf’),
where v is the group velocity and D, is the dispersion coefficient. We now demon-
strate that under such conditions the envelope A(z, t) satisfies the partial differential
cquation РА 4n (OA 10A
Ar
[+ | = 0. (23.3-24)
ot D, \ Oz  v Ot
If the time delay z/v is ignored (or a coordinate system moving with the pulse velocity
v is used), then (23.3-24) simplifies to
OA 47 OA
OR TID Os =0, (23.3-25)
и vy OZ SVE Diffusion Equation
which is recognized as the diffusion equation.
[] Proof of the SVE Diffusion Equation т a Dispersive Medium. The proof begins with the filter
equation A(z, f) = A(0, f)H.(z, f) from which A(z, f) = A(0, f) exp[—j2a(z/v) f — jaD_zf?],
where A(z, }) is the Fourier transform of A(z, $). Taking the derivative with respect to = we obtain the
differential equation (d/dz) A(z, f) = [—j2af/v — jnD, f?]A(z, Г). Forming the inverse Fourier
transform of both sides with respect to f, and noting that the inverse Fourier transforms of A(z, f),
joa fA(z, f), and (j2rf)?A(z, f) are A(z,t), OA(z,t)/Ot, and 0?.A(z,t)/Ot?, respectively, we
obtain (23.3-24). |

1112 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
The impulse response function associated with the diffusion equation is
1 Tt?
he(t) РЕ ехр (: Aa) ‚ (23.3-26)
which is identical to that of a chirp filter (23.2-7) with b = D,zvr.

For an initial Gaussian distribution A(0,t) = Ap exp(—t?/7@), the diffusion
equation is known to have a Gaussian solution, A(z,t) = Ao./—jz0/(z — 720)
exp [j(7/D,)t?/(z — 720), where 20 = 7)/D,. Accounting for the time delay, we
replace t with # — z/v and reproduce (23.3-7).

[] *Derivation of the SVE Diffusion Equation from the Helmholtz Equation. Equation (23.3-
24) may also be directly derived from the Helmholtz equation [d?/dz? + 6?(v)|V(z,v) = 0.
Since U(z,t) = A(z,t) exp(—j6oz) exp(j27vot), its Fourier transform is V(z,v) = A(z,v —
Yo) exp(—jBoz) where A(z,v) is the Fourier transform of A(z,t). Substituting и = vo + f, the
Helmholtz equation yields [d?/dz? + 6?(v + f)|[A(z, f) exp(—j80z)] = 0. Using the SVE
approximation d?/dz?[A exp(—jBo2zt)| = [-j280dA/dz — ВА] exp(—j8oz), Helmholtz equation
becomes —j269dA/dz + [8?(vo + f) — ВА = 0. For weak dispersion, 6?(vo + f) — В =
2Bo [В (№ + Г) — Bo]. As before, we approximate the propagation constant 3(v) by a 3-term Taylor-
series expansion В(м + f) = Bo + 2af В' + 2? }28", where Bo = B(wo), BY = d8/dw.,,, and
В” = d?B/dw?|,,,. With this, Helmholtz equation now becomes —jdA/dz+ [27 f 8’ +27? f?B"A =
0. Performing an inverse Fourier transform and noting that the multipliers /27f and —4л? f? are
equivalent to the derivatives д/0Е and 0? /Ot?, respectively, we obtain —j0A/Oz — 18В'0А/0Е —
38" 0? А/ОР = 0. Finally, substituting В’ = 1/v and В" = D,,/27, we obtain (23.3-24). a
*D. Analogy Between Dispersion and Diffraction
A striking mathematical similarity is observed between the SVE diffusion equation
0°A/dt? + j(40/D,) OA/Oz = 0, which describes the propagation of a pulse A(z, t)
in a dispersive medium (in a frame moving with velocity v, and neglecting dispersion
terms higher than the quadratic term), and the paraxial Helmholtz equation V7.A —
1(4т/Л) OA/Oz = 0, which describes the diffraction of an optical beam A(z, у, 2)
through free space in the paraxial approximation. Both are diffusion equations (the
former is 1D and the latter is 2D). This similarity indicates that the temporal spreading
(dispersion) of a pulse as it travels through the dispersive medium obeys the same
mathematical law that governs the spatial spreading (diffraction) of a beam in the
transverse plane as it travels through free space, with time ¢ playing the role of the
transverse coordinate р = (x,y) and the dispersion coefficient —D,, playing the role
of the wavelength Л. Various features of this analogy are summarized in Table 23.3-2.

The analogy between the dispersion coefficient —D, and the wavelength Л is ар-
preciated more fully if time $ is measured in units of distance traveled at the speed
of light, ct. In these units с?) has units of distance and its role in determining the
scale of pulse dispersion is quantitatively similar to the role played by the wavelength
in determining the scale of diffraction. For example, if D, = 10723 s?/m, then c?.D,, =
0.9 wm, which is equivalent to 3 fs.

Another interesting analogy relates the role of a lens in altering the wavefront
curvature and the role of a quadratic phase modulator (QPM) in chirping a pulse.
A thin lens introduces multiplication by a phase factor exp(jap?/Af) [see (2.4-9)],
while a QPM introduces multiplication by a phase factor exp(j¢t?) (see Sec. 23.2C).
Writing exp(j¢t?) = exp[jat?/(—D_f)], where © = —1D,_f, we see that the QPM

23.3 PULSE PROPAGATION IN OPTICAL FIBERS 1113

Table 23.3-2 Comparison between diffraction in space (paraxial approximation) and dispersion

in a dispersive medium (second-order approximation). The dispersion coefficient —D, in pulse

dispersion plays the role of the wavelength Л in diffraction. The quadratic phase modulator (QPM) is
analogous to a temporal lens.

Diffraction Dispersion |

Complex Complex

envelope А(р, =) envelope A(z,t)

Transverse = 2 2 :

= \/12 + Time t

coordinate р у

Axial Axial

coordinate 2 coordinate 2

Paraxial ae 2

An OA SVE diffusion OA 4 OA

Helmholtz V2.A-j——=0 a5 tin = =0

equation Х dz (moving frame) ot D, dz

Wavelength А Disp ого —-D,

coefficient

Impulse j ( tt 2) о 1 ( nt? )

response exp | -—j—— ——— exp | j——

function йо (р) А Az function h.(t) VID LZ D,z

Lens exp(jmp?/Af) QPM exp(j¢t”)

Focal length f Focal length f=7/(-D.)
is equivalent to a time lens that compresses the pulse to a minimum width at z = f,
where f = 1/(—D,C) is a focal length, confirming (23.3-22).

The mathematical analogy between the temporal spreading of a Gaussian pulse in a
dispersive medium (Sec. 23.3B) and the spatial spreading of a Gaussian beam in free
space (Sec. 3.1B) is summarized in Table 23.3-3. The dispersion length 20 is analogous
to the diffraction length (Rayleigh range) zo. Though the latter is always positive,
the former is defined such that it is positive for normal dispersion and negative for
anomalous dispersion. This explains the negative sign in the parameter zo that appears
in the expression for the complex envelope of the Gaussian pulse.

Table 23.3-3 Comparison between the diffraction of a Gaussian beam in free space and the
dispersion of a Gaussian pulse in a dispersive medium.

Beam W(z) =Wov/1 + (2/20)? | Pulse т(2) = t\/1 + (2/20)?

width о ° width ° °

Diffraction _ 2 Dispersion —_ 2

Divergence — Spreading

half angle 9 = A/mWo rate (s/m) |Dv|/779

Wavefront un 7k 2m iz Chirping n 27 2

curvature p= Riz) dv’ 242 rate = D, 22 +2

Spatial _ И”? (=) 2 Chirp Ти

chirp a(z) = 2R(z) д parameter a(2) = 277 (2) = 20

1114 — CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
Because of the mathematical analogy between spatial diffraction and temporal dis-
persion, and between the lens and the quadratic phase modulator (QPM), each con-
ventional optical system comprising combinations of free space and lenses has an
analogous temporal system comprising combinations of dispersive media and QPMs.
Figure 23.3-8 provides a number of examples:
Spatial Optics Temporal Optics
50 x t
я
3 Wo У т т
о
5. Е — <
n
$ GVD
x 1
2
Е И Wo т то
8
iam < <
5
Lens QPM (+) = GVD (-)
2p x и t т
Е У у п 72
Е < <
$
Lens IGVD (-) ОРМ (+) GVD(-)
x t
on
R=
>
S
$
3 Lens Lens Lens QPM (+) QPM (+) QPM (+)
GVD (-) GVD (-)
Е м О f—+}-— ps —
Е
В
3 к Zz
Е
и jeosQt \\V QPM (+)
з Lens ° бур бро
Figure 23.3-8 Analogy of spatial optics (left column) and temporal optics (right column). The
quadratic phase modulator (QPM) plays the role of the lens. The shaded areas represent the spatial
width of a wave (left) and the temporal width of a pulse (right) as functions of z. In the right column,
time delays are ignored and only time spread is shown. The optical pulse (right) is assumed to travel
in a medium with negative GVD. The figures in the right column are also applicable for a medium
with positive GVD, but in this case the QPM must be negative.
= Temporal spreading of a pulse in a dispersive medium is analogous to spatial
diffraction of a beam, or a wave transmitted through an aperture.
= Temporal compression of a pulse by a QPM is analogous to spatial focusing of a
beam by a lens. For example, since a Gaussian beam is focused by a lens of focal

23.4 ULTRAFASTLINEAROPTICS 1115
length f into a width Ил = (A/7Wo)f, it follows by analogy that a Gaussian
pulse is compressed by a QPM into a temporal width 7, = 1/¢7) = (—D,/n70)f,
where f = 1/(—D,C) is the focal length of the QPM. Another example of the
time-focusing effect of the QPM is the focusing of two separated narrow pulses
at z = O into one single pulse at z = f.

= The counterpart to single-lens imaging in conventional optics is a system using a

QPM as a temporal lens that generates a magnified or minified replica of the pulse
temporal profile, i.e., a temporal image (see Prob. 23.3-4).

= A periodic sequence of QPMs, designed to maintain the width of a pulse, is

analogous to a periodic set of relaying lenses.

= The counterpart to a 2-f Fourier transform system (see Sec. 4.2) is a 2- } temporal

Fourier transform system using a QPM. The system, for example, transforms a
phase modulated optical pulse into an amplitude modulated pulse whose temporal
profile is the Fourier transform of the original pulse.

One primary difference between spatial diffraction and temporal dispersion is that
the wavelength Л is always positive, while its counterpart —D, may be positive or
negative. The implication of this difference may be appreciated by examining the
impulse response functions in Table 23.3-2. The positivity of the wavelength Л implies
that a point of light must spread into a diverging phase front (a spherical wave). By
analogy, in a medium with negative D, (1.е., positive —D,), an impulse of light spreads
into a down-chirped pulse. Conversely, in a medium with positive D, (i.e., normal
dispersion), an impulse of light spreads into an up-chirped pulse. Both signs of chirp
are permitted, whereas spatial diffraction admits only diverging waves.

23.4 ULTRAFAST LINEAR OPTICS

The spatial and temporal characteristics of pulsed waves are inherently coupled. Spa-
tial spreading (or focusing) depends on the initial temporal profile, and the temporal
pulse shape is influenced by the initial spatial pattern. These effects are particularly
pronounced for ultranarrow optical pulses and for optical systems that exhibit angular
dispersion. Only in a few special cases does a pulsed optical wave exactly maintain its
temporal profile as it travels (examples are the plane wave and the spherical wave, as
discussed in Sec. 23.1C). For optical pulses with a slowly varying envelope, the quasi-
CW approximation is applicable, in which case the temporal and spatial changes are
approximately decoupled. This approximation is not applicable for ultranarrow pulses,
however. In this section we consider the propagation of ultranarrow pulsed beams in
simple imaging systems. We begin with a simplified analysis based on ray optics and
subsequently proceed to a theory based on wave optics using a Fourier-optics approach.
A. Ray Optics

Ray optics is based on the description of light by rays that are reflected and refracted at
optical boundaries in accordance with Snell’s law (Sec. 1.1). Temporal effects are ac-
commodated in this theory since rays are assumed to travel with a medium-dependent
velocity с = c,/n. We used this theory in Sec. 10.3B to estimate the spreading of the
time of arrival of optical rays inside an optical fiber by determining the time of travel
for each of the optical paths and estimating the difference between the longest and
shortest delays.

If some of the components of the optical system are dispersive, then the delay
introduced by these components must be based on the group velocity v = c,/N, rather
than the phase velocity с = c,/n, where № = п — A, ап/аЛь is the group index [see

1116 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

(5.7-2)]. Estimating the broadening of an optical pulse as it travels through an optical
system is therefore an exercise in determining the difference between the longest and
shortest group delays for all possible optical paths.

Pulse Broadening in a Single-Lens Imaging System

In the single-lens imaging system illustrated in Fig. 23.4-1, an optical pulse is emitted
at point Ру in the form of multiple rays that meet at the conjugate point Py. Each ray
travels through air and the glass of the lens and is delayed accordingly. If the glass is
nondispersive, then in accordance with Fermat’s principle (Sec. 1.1) all rays arrive at
the same time, and the pulse is not broadened. To account for the effect of dispersion,
it is convenient to define the differential delay as the difference between the group
delay (based on the group velocity v) and the phase delay (based on the phase velocity
c). The difference between the longest and shortest differential delays then constitutes
the pulse broadening. The differential delay is, of course, zero for the nondispersive
portions of the optical path, so that attention need be directed only to the differential
delay in the lens material.

Marking each ray by its position (x,y) in the plane of the lens, and denoting the
lens thickness at position (a, y) as d(x, у), the differential delay is written as

1 1 n—-N
rey) рта = ПМ. (34-1
су Со
The width of the broadened pulse is the difference between the maximum and mini-
mum values of 7 (2, у), so that
Дт(т, у) = п- N|Ad/c, (23.4-2)
where Аа is the difference between the maximum and minimum widths of the lens. For
a thin lens of focal length f and maximum thickness dp, (2.4-8) and (2.4-10) provide
d(x,y) = do— (a? +y")/2R = do - (x? +y?)/2(n—1)f, with (22+?) = (2/2),
where D is the diameter of the lens aperture. Thus, Ad = (D/2)?/2(n — 1)f and
Дт = [п — N|/(n — 1)](D/2)?/2cof, from which we have
—N| 1
Ar = MAI — Г. (23.4-3)
n—1 84 co Pulse Spreading
where F'y = f /D is the lens F-number.
A
h сы wa
t р Figure 23.4-1 Pulse broadening in
a single-lens imaging system resulting
Py Po from material (chromatic) dispersion.
As an example, for a BK7-glass lens at А, = 400 nm, n = 1.53, andn — N =
Ло п/а = —0.052. If f = 30 mm and Fy = 2, the pulse spreads to a width
Дт я 307 fs.

In this system, the pulse broadening is a result of the differential material dispersion
associated with the multiple spatial paths of the rays. Without material dispersion, the
existence of multiple paths would not result in pulse broadening, thanks to Fermat’s
principle.

23.4 ULTRAFASTLINEAR OPTICS 1117
*B. Wave and Fourier Optics
The wave nature of light dictates that a monochromatic narrow optical beam spreads
into a wide cone with an angle directly proportional to the wavelength and inversely
proportional to the original beam width. When the beam is modulated by an ultra-
short pulse with a broad spectrum, each of its wavelength components spreads into
its own cone, with the short-wavelength components occupying cones of smaller an-
gles. Consequently, the spectral composition of the propagated light at each point
in space is altered, with the points farther from the axis having less energy at the
shorter wavelengths, as illustrated in Fig. 23.4-2. At off-axis points, the spectrum is
therefore shifted to a lower central frequency (red shift) and the spectral width is
reduced and accompanied by temporal broadening. This example demonstrates that the
spatial and temporal characteristics of light are entwined through the very process of
wave propagation, particularly when the beam is ultranarrow and the pulse is ultrashort.
x „— $(и) 1
|
sw) | в ° R/'\B
|
— и > :
Ns (и) В В
I
в ии РА
Figure 23.4-2 Spreading of а pulsed beam. The long-wavelength components (В) spread into
cones with angles greater than those of the short-wavelength components (B). This results in the
suppression of the short-wavelength components at off-axis points, and hence a red shift and a
reduction of the spectral width accompanied by an increase in the pulse duration.

Though the propagation of ultrashort light pulses through arbitrary optical sys-
tems is complicated by the inherent space-time coupling, the analysis is conceptu-
ally simple when the system is linear since a Fourier approach can be used to re-
duce the problem to one of a superposition of solutions for each of the constituent
monochromatic components. An arbitrary pulsed wave U(r, $) is decomposed into a
sum of monochromatic components with amplitudes given by the Fourier transform
V(r,v) = [ U(r,t) exp(—j27t) dt. The propagation of each monochromatic com-
ponent through the system is determined using the tools developed in Chapters 2-4,
and the overall solution is subsequently obtained by superposition, i.e., by an inverse
Fourier transform U(r,t) = [ V(r,v) exp(j2avt) dv.

Fourier Optics of Pulsed Waves

The propagation of monochromatic light between two parallel planes, denoted 1 and 2,
with an arbitrary linear optical system sandwiched between, may be described by the
linear transformation [see (B.2-1) of Appendix B and Chapter 4]:

Valeur) = | [ мои деи, dad (23.4-4)
where /; is the impulse response function of the system at frequency и. For a pulsed
input wavefunction Uj; (x, y,t), the output wavefunction U2(x,y,t) may be readily
determined by computing its Fourier transform V2(x, у, и) via (23.4-4), and then com-
puting the inverse Fourier transform.

1118 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
The impulse response function h has been determined in Chapter 4 for various opti-
cal components. The results are reproduced here with the dependence on the frequency
и made explicit:
= Free space. In accordance with (4.1-18), which is valid in the Fresnel approxi-
mation, propagation through a distance z of free space is equivalent to a system
with impulse response function
: 2 pl \2 _ a A\2
h(x,2’,y,y', v) ~ jv exp | ее ew) . (23.4-5)
Cz с 22
We have ignored the factor exp(—j27vz/c) that belongs to ho in (4.1-18) since
it represents an inconsequential constant time delay z/c.
= Aperture. Transmission through a planar aperture is equivalent to multiplication
by the aperture function (which is, in accordance with (4.3-2), unity within the
aperture and zero outside it).
= Lens. Transmission through a thin double-convex lens of focal length f is, ac-
cording to (2.4-9) and (2.4-11), equivalent to multiplication by the quadratic phase
factor
2 2 2
+(т,у, и) = exp (in? a) exp (=F) ‚ (23.4-6)
Со Co 2}
where р = \/12 + y? is the radial distance and the focal length f is given by
1 1 1
==(n-1)|—-— }. (23.4-7)
f ( ) (= в.)
Here R, and В2 are the two radii of the spherical lens. If the refractive index n
of the lens material is wavelength dependent, then the focal length f depends on
the optical frequency v. Material dispersion thus results in chromatic aberration,
which in turn contributes to the distortion of ultrashort optical pulses.
With the help of these equations, it is in principle possible to determine the зрасе-
time dependence of the output wave for any input pulsed wave transmitted through any
system comprising combinations of free space, apertures, and lenses.
Optical Fourier-Transform System
Consider, for example, an optical system involving the propagation of a monochro-
matic wave between the front and back focal planes of a lens. Ignoring the y depen-
dence for simplicity, this system is described by an impulse response function
, „пи
h(a, 2',v) = hi exp ет хх |, (23.4-8)
с
where h; = (jv/cf) exp(—j4av f /c) is a constant [see (4.2-8)]; this corresponds to
a spatial Fourier transform for monochromatic light, as described in Sec. 4.2. This
system exhibits strong temporal-spatial coupling — the temporal waveform at a fixed
point at the output plane is heavily influenced by the spatial distribution of the wave at
the input plane. Similarly, the spatial distribution at the output plane is sensitive to the
temporal waveform of the input field.

23.4 ULTRAFAST LINEAR OPTICS 1119

To illustrate this point, consider the special case in which the input wavefunction is
separable in time and space, U; (x,t) = g(t)p(x). This wavefunction may be generated
by transmitting a pulsed plane wave of amplitude g(t) through a spatial light modulator
(SLM) with frequency-independent transmittance p(x), as illustrated in Fig. 23.4-3.
The Fourier transform of U; (x,t) is И! (т, и) = G(v)p(x), where G(v) is the Fourier
transform of g(t). Substituting Vi (x, к), together with the impulse response function
of the optical Fourier-transform system given in (23.4-8), into (23.4-4) reveals that the
field at the output plane is characterized by

Vo(a,v) «x jvG(v)P(vx/cf), (23.4-9)
where P(v,) = f p(x) exp (j27v,,) 4х is the spatial Fourier transform of p().

It is evident from (23.4-9) that the output field is no longer time-space separable.
Since the temporal waveform of the field at a fixed position то in the output plane is
governed by (23.4-9), the transfer function of the linear system that relates U2(ao, t) to
the input pulse g(t) is

H(v) х jvP(vxo/cf). (23.4-10)
This temporal transfer function is seen to be a scaled version of the spatial Fourier
transform of the input spatial distribution p(x).

The corresponding temporal impulse response function is obtained by taking the

temporal inverse Fourier transform of both sides of (23.4-10),
h(t) x p(tcf/xo), (23.4-11)
Space-to-Time Conversion
revealing that the value of the function h(t) at time $ is controlled by the transmittance
of the SLM at one-and-only-one position, x = (cf /ao)t. Equivalently, the transmit-
tance of the mask at a point x controls the value of the impulse response function of
the system at one-and-only-one time, t = (a 9/cf)a. This configuration thus serves
as a direct space-to-time conversion system, which can be used for pulse shaping. A
similar pulse-shaping system using a combination of a diffraction grating and an SLM
was discussed in Sec. 23.2D.
Input f f Output
pulse g(t) VA pulse
гк a "у — t
PO)
x
SLM Lens Fourier
plane
Figure 23.4-3 A spatial Fourier-transform system couples the temporal and spatial distributions
of the input pulsed light. The shape of the output pulse at a fixed position is governed by the spatial
distribution at the input, which is controlled by the SLM (see Sec. 21.1E).

1120 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
*C. Beam Optics

The Fourier approach described in the previous section (23.4B) may be applied to the
study of pulsed Gaussian beams. Consider first a Gaussian beam modulated in the plane
of its waist by a pulse g(t), ie., Ui(x,y,t) = g(t) exp(—p?/W?) ог У, (х,у, В «
G(v) exp(—p?/W2), where Wo is the beam radius and G(v) is the Fourier transform
of g(t). At an arbitrary distance z, the spatiotemporal wavefunction is determined by
use of (23.4-4) and (23.4-5),

Кии) <1 G(v) 222) ( и р ) (23.4-12)

жи) x vy G(v) ————— exp| —j — |, 4-
wee zt ja) \ Te z+ Fz)
where
пи
zo(v) = — и (23.4-13)
с

is the diffraction length (Rayleigh range) at frequency v. Equation (23.4-12) is the
standard expression of the wavefunction of a Gaussian beam [see (3.1-5)] with the
frequency dependence of the diffraction length made explicit. The beam radius and the
radius of curvature given by (3.1-8) and (3.1-9) are also frequency dependent.

If the spectral width is sufficiently narrow, then in accordance with the quasi-CW
approximation the spatial distribution of the Gaussian beam may be approximated by
its values at the central frequency и = 1, and consequently the time-space dependence
is separable, as described earlier by (23.1-25). For ultranarrow (1.е., broadband) pulses,
this approximation is not applicable.

The temporal profile of the pulse may be determined at an arbitrary point (р, =) by
evaluating the inverse Fourier transform of (23.4-12)). In general, a numerical solution
is necessary.

Gaussian-Pulsed Gaussian Beam
If the original wave is modulated by a Gaussian pulse g(t) =exp(—t?/7¢ )exp(j27vot),
then G(v) x exp[—m?73(v — и)?] is also Gaussian. An approximate analytical
expression for Vj(x,y,v) in the far zone [2 >> 2o(v) for all v] may be obtained as
follows: The factor [z + jzo(v)]~> = 271 [1 + jzo(v)/z]_* in the exponent of (23.4-
12) is approximated by z~! [1 — jzo(v)/z], and the same factor in the amplitude is
approximated by z~!. Using (23.4-13), we obtain the far-zone expression
W292 2
У>(х,у,и) х jvexp [—1? 765 (v _ ю)] exp(-n2 tee *) exp (2) .

(23.4-14)

The inverse Fourier transform of (23.4-14) may now be determined. The phase
factor in the exponent is equivalent to a time delay p?/2cz. The factor jv in the
amplitude is equivalent to a derivative 0/Ot. The middle two Gaussian functions are
combined into one Gaussian function of и whose inverse Fourier transform is another
Gaussian function. The result may be cast in the normalized form

exp[—tNp?/(p? + 28) ехр(—&/ть) .
U. t) « > —J2TV pt 23.4-15

X(t) TD ту (Який, | 34-15)

Gaussian-Pulsed Gaussian Beam

23.4 ULTRAFAST LINEAR OPTICS 1121
where
tp =t— p?/2cz = t — tN70(z/20)(p"/2p5) (23.4-16)
is a position-dependent delay time,
Tp = T0\/1 + p?/pe (23.4-17)
iS a position-dependent time constant,
Vo М /то
vy, = ——_- = —_ ИВ (23.4-18)
° 1+ p?/p3  1+0?/0
is a position-dependent central frequency,
М = 70 (23.4-19)
is the number of optical cycles within the width то of the initial pulse, and
po = T7NW(z) = МИ 2/20, (23.4-20)
where W(z) = Woz/zo is the far-zone beam radius for a CW wave at the central
frequency vo and z = ли? / Ло 15 the associated diffraction length. As a function
of the normalized transverse distance р/ро and the normalized time t/7, the far-zone
wavefunction is completely described by two free parameters: № and the ratio 2/20.
The intensity p(x, y,t) = |U2(z, y, t)|? is
—~2nNp2/(p2 2\) exp(—2t?/7?2
Iy(ax,y,t) x ехр 27 Np (р + Pod] exp 2/79) (23.4-21)
ГР ТЕРМ
This is а universal function of t/79 and р/ро characterized by only one free parameter
№. The spectral intensity So(x,y,v) = |Vo(a, у, v)|? is
2 2 _y)2
So(a,y,v) x — exp [2x exp [еле ‚  (23.4-22)
и р + Po "р
which is а universal function of v/v and р/ро, characterized by the free parameter №.
Based on (23.4-15)-(23.4-22), we conclude that the pulse at a point (p,z) in the
far-zone has the following characteristics (see Fig. 23.4-4):
= The pulse is delayed by time p”/2cz, which is the travel time between the center
of the beam (0, 0) and the point (р, 2).
= The pulse temporal profile is the product of a Gaussian function of width т, =
To[1 + p?/p2]!/? and a Lorentzian function of width 7N79. The width of the
Gaussian function is то at р = 0, and increases with the transverse distance р,
reaching the value \/2 то at p = po. The phase shift arctan(t,/aN 7») introduced
by the Lorentzian function is a manifestation of the Gouy effect (see Sec. 3.1B)
for pulsed Gaussian beams.

1122 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
= The pulse central frequency и, depends on the transverse distance р. Starting
at the value № on axis (р = 0), it decreases monotonically with increase of р,
reaching 1/2 at = ро. This is a consequence of the fact that long-wavelength
(low-frequency) components of the pulse spread into wider cones, as illustrated
in Fig. 23.4-2. For the same reason, the farther the point is from the beam axis,
the smaller the spectral width and the greater the temporal width.
= The initial Gaussian spatial distribution is altered dramatically as ¢ increases.
An initially single-peaked distribution builds up, is subsequently flattened, and
eventually becomes double-peaked as it decays (see Fig. 23.4-4).
So(p,V)
, А В А
АЕ . 9 1 1.1
70 27 ЗЕ
Ито
Figure 23.4-4 Temporal and spatial spreading of a Gaussian beam modulated by а Gaussian pulse.
Initially, the beam has radius И and temporal width то (left surface plot). The far-zone intensity
Iz(p,t) is illustrated in the right surface plot. Time is normalized to the initial pulse width то,
transverse distance is normalized to ро, and the intensity has arbitrary units. At a fixed time t, 15 (р, t)
provides a snapshot of the intensity as a function of position. It changes from a single-peaked function
at t = О to a double-peaked function at $ = то, and eventually becomes two separate weak peaks
at $ = 27) and beyond. The temporal profile at a fixed position is also depicted by this surface. In
the center of the beam, the pulse has its shortest width. At off-axis points the pulse is weakened,
delayed, and has longer duration. The spectral intensity 52 (р, и) is shown (top right) as a function of
the normalized frequency v/v at two positions, A and В, and is normalized such that the peak value
is unity for each position. In this plot, N = vot) = 5; 1.е., the pulse has five optical cycles. As an
example, № = 5 for a pulse of central frequency vp = 750 THz (Ao = 400 nm) and width то = 6.67 fs.
If Wo = 1 mm, then 20 = 7.85 т, Woz/zp = 5 mm, and ро © 8 cm.
Focusing of a Pulsed Beam
If a beam of arbitrary spatial distribution p(x, у) modulated with a pulse of arbitrary
temporal shape g(t) is transmitted through a lens of focal length f followed by a
distance z of free space, then by substituting U;(x,y,t) = g(t)p(x, у) into (23.4-4)
and (23.4-5) we obtain
-2 +2 12 + 12
V2(a,y,v) x Gv) // da'dy'p(x', y') exp (—j*5*do) exp (em)
__pl)\2 — 2/2
ехр (Раз we") ‚ (23.4-23)
where G(v) is the Fourier transform of g(t). We have here assumed that the lens has
an aperture wider than the beam width.

23.4 ULTRAFAST LINEAROPTICS 1123

If the lens material is nondispersive, so that n and f are independent of v, then at
points in the focal plane z = f, (23.4-23) simplifies to

У (ту) <vG(v)P (8 ‚Эти р. (23.4-24)
хуи) xvG(v —,— | exp | -7 —— 4-
2%, У, cf 5) cf р J C 2; )
where Р(и,, vy) = |] ахаур(х, у) exp [12т (их + vyy)] is the spatial Fourier trans-
form of p(x, у). The factor exp(—j27vdo/c) has been ignored since it now represents
a simple time delay. The wavefunction in the focal plane is the temporal inverse Fourier
transform of V2(x, у, и), so that
2
Uo(x, y, t) x pec (==. и) ехр | (: _ 2) dv. (23.4-25)
The coupling of the temporal and spatial features of the pulsed beam is evident in (23.4-
25). In addition to the space-dependent time delay t — p”/2cf, the Fourier transform
of the original spatial profile is scaled by the frequency-dependent factor cf/v before it
is averaged over the spectral distribution of the pulse.

As an example, for a Gaussian beam p(x, y) = exp (=p? / We) modulated by a
Gaussian pulse g(t) = exp(—t?/7@) exp(j27vot), 1е., G(v) x exp[—1?76(v — vp)?]
and P(v,, vy) = exp [—1?W@ (v2 + v2) |, (23.4-24) gives

Wo\? 2
У>(х,у, и) х vexp [72 (и- и)? ехр | (=) a exp (тих) .
(23.4-26)

This expression is identical to that for the far-zone Gaussian beam (23.4-14), with
z = f. Thus, the corresponding wavefunction U2(x,y,t) is given by (23.4-15)—(23.4-
22) with z = f. The graphs in Fig. 23.4-4 are applicable here with z = f, zo being the
diffraction length of the original (not the focused) beam, and

po = TNWof /20 = NAOf /Wo = МИХ, (23.4-27)
where Wj = A.f /aWo is the beam radius at the focal plane for a CW beam with
wavelength A, [see (3.2-15) and (3.2-17)]. As before, N = мл is the number of
optical cycles within the initial pulse. The characteristic transverse radius ро is there-
fore я № times greater than ИХ. Figure 23.4-5 is an illustration of the spatiotemporal
distribution of the pulse in the focal plane.

*Pulsed Beams in Dispersive Media

The process of diffraction of pulsed light in a dispersive medium can be complex.
If the medium is linear and homogeneous, then the Helmholtz equation [V? +
B?(v)|V(r,v) = 0 describes this process for arbitrary dispersion properties, charac-
terized by the propagation constant 6(v), and for a pulse with arbitrary spatial-spectral
profile У (г, и). Once У (г, и) is determined by solving this equation, the corresponding
wavefunction U(r, t) may be readily determined by an inverse Fourier transform. This
approach is, in principle, valid no matter how dispersive the medium or how narrow
the pulse.

Approximations similar to those that led independently to the paraxial Helmholtz
equation, which describes beam diffraction, and the SVE equation, which describes
pulse dispersion (see Table 23.3-2), may be combined to derive a partial differential
equation for the envelope A(r,t) of a pulse with a narrow spectral distribution. An

1124 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
HAN I(p,
р AN P/ Po
~— f Le 0
0 <a
2 1/T
Figure 23.4-5 Focal-plane spatiotemporal profile of the intensity of a Gaussian beam modulated
by a Gaussian pulse and focused by a lens of focal length }. In this plot the initial pulse has N = 5
optical cycles and the initial beam has a diffraction length 2о >> f. The difference between this and
the spatiotemporal profile in Fig. 23.4-4 is attributed to the fact that here the time delay p?/2cf =
то(п№/2) (1/20) (р? / ре) is negligible for f < zo at off-axis points with р < po.
approach following the same steps described in Sec. 23.2C results in the generalized
paraxial wave equation:
02А (0A 10A
—ЛУТ.А + Dive til 55+ 55 ) =o (23.4-28)
t 2 ua Generalized Paraxial
Wave Equation
This equation generalizes (23.1-24), which is applicable for nondispersive media
(D, = 0), as well as (2.2-23), which is applicable for the CW case for which
9?А/0Ё = OA/at = 0.
С Proof of the Generalized Paraxial Wave Equation. The wavefunction and its Fourier transform
are related to the envelope and its Fourier transform by U(r, $) = A(r, t) exp(—j Boz) exp(g27v0t)
and V(r,v) = A(r,v — vy) exp(—jfoz). The paraxial approximation, (d?/dz?)[A exp(—j80z)] =
[—j280dA/dz —62 A] exp (—j Boz), can be used to convert the Helmholtz equation to
[Ут — j28od/dz] А + [6°(vo + f) — 63] A = 0. (23.4-29)
For weak dispersion, we use the approximation 0? (мо + f) — 83 = 260 [B(vo + f) — Bo] together
with a 3-term Taylor-series expansion 3(vp + f) = в +278 f +2778” f?. The Helmholtz equation
then becomes
УТА- 128 дА/дд + 28% [2 f В’ + 20? f?B"] A=0. (23.4-30)
Performing an inverse Fourier transform and noting that the multipliers j27f and -4л? f? are equiv-
alent to the derivatives 0/0t and д? /0t?, respectively, we obtain
1
V7A — 280 [ол + jB'0A/Ot + sore ajor| =0. (23.4-31)
Finally, substituting 6’ = 1/v and В” = О, /2т and Во = 2 /Ло, we obtain (23.4-28). [|
The paraxial SVE equation admits а space-time Gaussian solution
—720' (п t—2/v Е п р?
А(т,у, 2,1) = Ao a exp jt tol : a exp —j- ,
z— 32%! Dy =- 120'| 2+ 920 Аз + 720
(23.4-32)

23.4 ULTRAFAST LINEAR OPTICS 1125
that has a spatiotemporal Gaussian initial envelope A(x, y,0,t) = Ao exp(—t?/7@)
exp(—p?/W@), where 2) = m7?/D, and 20 = tW@/d are, respectively, the dis-
persion length associated with the initial pulse width ту and the diffraction length
associated with the initial beam radius Wo. This solution combines the diffraction of
a Gaussian beam (Chapter 3) and the dispersion of a Gaussian pulse (Sec. 23.3) in a
space-time separable fashion, as illustrated in Fig. 23.4-6.

х — сэ =
сто |= Е ии T
Wo 5
Ss
a
о А
Dispersion
Figure 23.4-6 Three snapshots of the spatial distribution of a pulse as it travels through a linear
dispersive medium. Because of diffraction, the pulse spreads in the transverse direction т. Because
of dispersion, it spreads in time (which is shown here as spatial spread in the direction of propagation
Since (23.4-28) and (23.4-32) are separable in time and space, we conclude that the
approximations to which these equations are subject are in effect tantamount to the
quasi-CW approximation described in Sec. 23.1C.
* Envelope Equation for Ultranarrow Pulsed Beam
When conditions for the SVE approximation are not met (i.e., the pulse is very nar-
row and the beam is very thin), then the space-time dependence is no longer sepa-
rable. The differential equation that governs the pulse envelope takes a more com-
plex form, although the very concept of envelope is then less meaningful. Beginning
with the Helmholtz equation [V? + 6?(v)|V(r,v) = 0 and substituting V(r,v) =
А(г, и— м) ехр(—780=) and и = vo +f, we obtain [V7 + 0? /02? — 1280/0=] A+
[8? (vo + Л) — 63] А = 0. Expanding the function [8?(v + f) — 83] in a Taylor-series
expansion up to the second order, we have [8?(vo + 1) — 88] = (2808')2a f + 3 (287 +
2808") (27 f)?. Transforming back to the time domain and reordering terms, we obtain
OPA 9 19 0? 1 0?
— АУЛА, +540 ( — +-— ) АМ (| = — -=5 | A=0, (23.4-33
р TI (F423) ° (= Ея) ( )
where и = 1/6’ and D, = 27". Equation (23.4-33) is more general than (23.4-
28) since the paraxial approximation and the weak dispersion approximation have not
been used. If 6”? < ВоВ” (or A, /v? < D,) and 07A/O2? < (4m/X,)OA/Oz, then
the fourth term in (23.4-33) is negligible and (23.4-33) reproduces (23.4-28).
Equation (23.4-33) may be expressed in a coordinate system moving at the pulse
velocity uv by using the transformation # = ¢t — z/v and z’ = z. The result is the
differential equation
OA OA CA 2 OA
2 . _
—ЛАУгА + р, 92 +75 — Ао (5-2 — ae = 0, (23.4-34)
which clearly exhibits spatiotemporal coupling.

1126 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS
The previous sections of this chapter have considered the propagation of optical pulses
in linear media, with an emphasis on the role of group velocity dispersion (GVD) in the
reshaping of short pulses. In this section, we consider the propagation of optical pulses
in nonlinear media. Nonlinear effects are more frequently encountered with ultrashort
pulses because of their higher intensity. Nonlinear optical phenomena were introduced
in Chapter 22; in particular, three-wave mixing in media with second-order nonlinear-
ity, and two- and four-wave mixing in media with third-order nonlinearity, were con-
sidered. In this section, some of these phenomena are revisited in the context of pulsed
optical waves. Section 23.5A deals with pulsed parametric processes, including three-
wave mixing, optical rectification, and self-phase modulation; Sec. 23.5B details the
theory of optical solitons; Sec. 23.5C is devoted to supercontinuum generation; and
Sec. 23.5D considers high-harmonic generation and attosecond optics.
A. Pulsed Parametric Processes
Three-wave mixing in a medium with second-order nonlinearity was discussed in
Sec. 22.2C for continuous waves (CW), and a coupled-wave theory was developed
in Sec. 22.4. The principal conditions for wave mixing are dictated by conservation of
energy and momentum. For pulsed waves with central angular frequencies ил, w2 and
из, and central wavevectors К1, ky, and kz, these conditions are: ил + wo = из and
К, + kg = ks. If dispersion effects are neglected, the CW theory is applicable to the
pulsed case; i.e., the pulse is regarded as “quasi-CW” at any time during its course, and
the envelopes of the three waves obey the same coupled-wave equations (22.4-20).
The Walk-Off Effect
If the medium exhibits first-order dispersion, but not second-order (GVD) or higher-
order dispersion, then the three pulsed waves travel at their group velocities without
altering their shapes (only their amplitudes are altered by the mixing process). Since
these velocities are generally different, the pulses eventually separate and the paramet-
ric process responsible for wave mixing ceases, a phenomenon known as the walk-
off effect. Therefore, for efficient pulsed-wave mixing, an additional condition is the
equality of the group velocities, v, = ve = v3. The walk-off effect is illustrated in
Fig. 23.5-1 in the degenerate case of collinear second-harmonic generation (ил = wg =
w and из = 2w).
t F SH
a ap” Figure 23.5-1 A pulsed wave at the fun-
damental frequency (F) and its associated
tl | second-harmonic wave (SH) separate аз
they travel at different velocities (in this
1 example, the SH wave is faster). The upper
ty graph is a space-time diagram for pulses
| ; ] " v1 \: 3 of duration 7. The lower schematic shows
— | — three snapshots of the traveling pulses at
- times t) < < tz.
It is difficult to satisfy both phase matching and group-velocity matching simulta-
neously. It was shown in Sec. 22.2D and Sec. 22.4A that for a phase matching error

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1127

Ak, second-harmonic generation diminishes significantly at a distance Г. = 27 /|Ak|,

called the coherence length [see (22.2-28)]. For a group-velocity matching error ДВ’ =

1/v3 —1/v1, the pulses separate by a time delay Af’z = z/v3 — 2/1 after traveling a

distance z. When this delay equals the pulse width 7, the pulses no longer overlap and

the nonlinear coupling ceases. This occurs at a distance

L, =т/|АВ' (23.5-1)

Walk-Off Length

called the walk-off length. The shorter of the distances Г. and L, dictates which of the
two effects, phase-velocity mismatch or group-velocity mismatch, dominates.

As an example, for a KDP crystal using an ordinary fundamental wave at A; = 1.06
jum and an extraordinary second-harmonic wave at Аз = 0.53 um in the Туре-П о-е-о
configuration, the group velocity mismatch AS’ = 2(1/v3 — 1/v1) = 5.2 x 10719
s/m. For a 100-fs pulse, the walk-off length L, = т/|АВ'| == 0.2 mm.

*Coupled-Wave Equations for Pulsed Three-Wave Mixing

The coupled-wave equations that were derived in Sec. 22.4 for CW waves may be
readily generalized to pulsed waves. For collinear plane waves traveling in the z di-
rection, the electric fields are expressed in terms of the complex envelopes as €, =
Re{ \/2nhiw, a,(z, t) ехр (wat — Baz), q = 1,2,3, where aj, аз, and аз are nor-
malized complex envelopes of the three pulses, and Вт, G2 and (3 are the propagation
constants at the central frequencies ил, Ww, and из. Using the slowly varying envelope
approximation and a two-term Taylor-series expansion of the propagation constant
В (и) near each of the central frequencies B(wy + 2) = Ву + ОВ, where В, is the
derivative 06 /Ow at изд, we obtain the coupled equations:

0 + 19 а: = —jgas3a5

Oz U1 Ot 1 I9G3A2

[2] 1д

rn ane =-—j 23.5-2

(5+ =) а2 7 9азат ( )

2 + 19 аз = —79а1а

dz vs at 3 = —799192,
where v,= 1/8, is the group velocity of the w, wave, and д is a constant given by (22.4-
21). These equations are similar to the CW coupled equations (22.4-20). If the group
velocities are equal, 1.е., 1 = vg = v3 = v, then by use of a coordinate system moving
with a velocity v, the pulsed coupled equations (23.5-2) become identical to the CW
coupled equations (22.4-20), and the solutions presented in Sec. 22.4 are applicable
with the variable z replaced by z — vt. If the group velocities are not equal, the solution
of (23.5-2) becomes more complex.

When the medium also exhibits GVD (see Prob. 23.5-2), a three-term Taylor-series
expansion В (wg +2) = By + O68) + 10? Ви leads to the coupled-wave equations:

0,10 „В 0? а, = аа

да wot 72 02] “17 790302

[2] 19 80? .

Jy os Pee = —7даза* 23.5-3
(5+5 72 ape) > 198% (23.5-3)

1128 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
dz vat 72 0] "37 FINS
Pulsed Optical Rectification: THz Pulse Generation
A pulsed wave with central frequency in the optical band and spectral width in the
THz range may be downconverted into a pulse of THz radiation. In essence, the pulse
is frequency shifted from the optical band to the THz band, as if it were rectified.
Figure 23.5-2 is a schematic illustration of the process.
Optical THz
pulse pulse
Figure 23.5-2 Generation of a THz
pulse by downconversion of an optical
wave.
—| J PS Nonlinear crystal —| Ps

When an optical pulse &(+) = Re{A(t) exp(jwot)} with slowly varying envelope
A(t) travels through a medium with second-order nonlinear optical coefficient d, it in-
duces a polarization density 246? (+), which has a term at 2wo, responsible for second-
harmonic generation, and another,

тн» = а, (23.5-4)
representing optical rectification (see Secs. 22.2А, 22.2C, and 22.4В).

In order to determine the appropriate phase matching conditions for this parametric
process, we resort to a Fourier approach. The pulsed optical wave can be regarded
as a sum of monochromatic waves with frequencies occupying a spectral band
surrounding the central frequency wo. Upon passage through the nonlinear medium,
these monochromatic components are mixed in pairs, each generating a downconverted
monochromatic wave at the frequency difference. In accordance with (22.2-13e), a pair
of waves at the angular frequencies ил = w and и> = w + О generates a nonlinear
polarization density Ppy,(Q) = 2dE*(w)E(w + Q) at the THz frequency © so that
the sum for all the pairs is

Pry, (Q) = [ewe + O)dw. (23.5-5)
In the time domain, this is equivalent to (23.5-4). To include nonlinear dispersion
effects, the nonlinear optical coefficient d in (23.5-5) must be replaced by a frequency-
dependent version d(Q, и, и + О) (see Sec. 22.7).

This downconversion process must satisfy the phase matching condition at all fre-
quencies w and ©. This condition cannot be met exactly, and an error

Ak = k(w + 0) — k(w) — k(Q) (23.5-6)
will arise. [О < w, this relation may be written in the approximate form

Ak = Qdk/dw — k(Q) = Q[1/v(w) — 1/e(Q)] = [N(w) = n(Q)JOQ/ceo,  (23.5-7)

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1129
where v(w) = (dk/dw)~' is the group velocity and N(w) is the group index at the
optical frequency w, and c(Q) and n(Q) are the phase velocity and refractive index at
the THz frequency 9. The device must therefore be designed in such a way that the
group index at optical frequencies is equal to the phase index at THz frequencies.

As was shown in Sec. 22.2D for a crystal of length Г, this phase-matching error
is small if L < Ге, where L. = 27/|Ak| is the coherence length [see (22.2-28)]. To
account for this effect, the factor fe exp(jAkz)dz = [exp(j AKL) — 1]/jAk must be
included within the integral of (23.5-5).

Pulse Self-Phase Modulation
Self-phase modulation (SPM) occurs in nonlinear media that exhibit the optical Kerr
effect (see Sec. 22.3B). The phase Ay introduced by this effect for a wave traveling a
distance z in a medium with optical Kerr coefficient nz is Ay = —n2Ikoz, where I is
the optical intensity and Ко is the wavenumber. For an optical pulse, the intensity is a
function of time I(t) so that the phase is time varying:
Ay(t) = —nel(t)koz. (23.5-8)

This corresponds to a change of the instantaneous frequency [see (23.1-4)]

Ч

dt

For a pulse with a simple shape, such as that illustrated in Fig. 23.5-3, if ng is
positive, the frequency of the trailing half of the pulse (the right half) is increased
(blue shifted) since А < 0, whereas the frequency of the leading half (the left half)
is reduced (red shifted) since dl/dt > 0. The pulse is therefore up-chirped (1.е., its
instantaneous frequency is increasing) near its center. It follows that SPM may be used
to introduce chirp, and may therefore be employed for pulse shaping (see Sec. 23.2D).

I(t) Optical K
medium (7g > 0) R | 8
И
Wi Wi
(CS Fo
t t
Figure 23.5-3  Chirping of an optical pulse by propagation through a nonlinear optical Kerr
medium.

For example, a Gaussian pulse may be approximated near its center by a parabolic
function, I(t) = Ip exp(—2t?/r?) = 01 — 2¢?/77], so that the time-varying compo-
nent of the phase is approximately a quadratic function of time Ay = 2ngIykyzt?/r?,
corresponding to a linear chirp with chirp coefficient a = 2п2ТоКо2 of the same sign as
the Kerr coefficient nz. Self-phase modulation therefore introduces a quadratic phase
modulation factor exp(jat?/7?) = exp(j¢t?), where

C = 2ngIokoz/7. (23.5-10)

1130 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
It is convenient to write the chirp parameter introduced by SPM in the form
—1
а=2/2щ,  2щ, = (21210), (23.5-11)
SPM Chirp Parameter
where |z,| is called the nonlinear characteristic length of the Kerr medium. The
phase introduced by traveling through the nonlinear material a distance 2|z,,,| at the
peak intensity Го is unity, 1.е., n2Ioko2|zy,| = 1.

It has been implicitly assumed in the preceding analysis that the medium is weakly
dispersive so that pulse broadening is negligible; 1.е., GVD is negligible in comparison
with SPM. This condition obtains if |20| >> |zy.|. Analysis of pulse propagation in
materials exhibiting both SPM and GVD is complex, as will be seen in the next section.

The quadratic phase modulation introduced by nonlinear SPM may be used in
conjunction with a linear dispersive device, such as a diffraction grating or prism
module, to implement pulse compression, as described in Sec. 23.2C and illustrated in
Example 23.5-1. The combination results in pulse compression by a factor V1 + a? =
АСР».
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 23.5-1. Pulse Compression Using Fiber SPM and Grating GVD. —_А 65-
fs pulse of peak power Py = 300 kW at a central wavelength Л. = 620 nm is chirped by а 9-mm
long silica-glass optical fiber of cross-sectional area A = 100 ип?, as illustrated in Fig. 23.5-4. At
this wavelength, ng = 3.2 x 10-20 m?/W so that the nonlinear characteristic length is |zx.| =
|2noIoko|~1 = Ло А/4п|п>|Рь = 0.5 mm. Since the fiber length 2 = 9 mm, the chirp parameter
introduced by the SPM is а = 2/2, = 18. This corresponds to a maximum pulse compression
factor 1+ a? = 18, or a compressed pulse of width 3.6 fs. The fiber also introduces GVD. At
620 nm, В” = 6 x 10-26 s?/m, so that the dispersion length for a pulse of width то = 65 fs is
20 = 70/28" = 3.5 ст. Since z >> 2нь, SPM dominates GVD. To achieve maximum compression,
the grating must introduce a chirp coefficient b = [a/(1 + а?)|т2 = 2.35 x 10-28 s? = (3.6 fs)?.

pulse Nonlinear optical fiber pulse Diffraction grating pulse
(positive SPM) (negative GVD)

Figure 23.5-4 Pulse compression by a combination of a quadratic phase modulation (QPM)
(introduced by SPM) and a chirp filter. The phase modulator is implemented using an optical fiber
exhibiting SPM, via the optical Kerr effect. The chirp filter is implemented using the GVD introduced
by a diffraction grating.
ПОНИ
В. Optical Solitons

The interplay between self-phase modulation (SPM) and group velocity dispersion
(GVD) in a medium exhibiting both the nonlinear optical Kerr effect and linear dis-
persion can result in a net pulse spreading or pulse compression, depending on the
magnitudes and signs of these two effects. Under certain conditions, an optical pulse
of prescribed shape and intensity can travel in such a nonlinear dispersive medium
without ever altering its shape, as if it were traveling in an ideal linear nondispersive
medium. This occurs when GVD fully compensates the effect of SPM, as illustrated in

23.5 ULTRAFASTNONLINEAR OPTICS 1131

Fig. 23.5-5(c). Such pulse-like stationary waves are called solitary waves. Optical soli-
tons are special solitary waves that are orthogonal, in the sense that when two of these
waves cross one another in the medium their intensity profiles are not altered (only
phase shifts are imparted as a result of the interaction), so that each wave continues to
travel as an independent entity.

(a) | !

Linear dispersive medium (negative GVD)
И и
(b) | ’
Nonlinear nondispersive medium (positive SPM)
© ни
Nonlinear dispersive medium (negative GVD + positive SPM)

Figure 23.5-5 (a) In a linear medium with negative GVD (anomalous dispersion), the shorter-
wavelength component B has a larger group velocity and therefore travels faster than the longer-
wavelength component R; this results in pulse spreading. (b) In a nonlinear medium with positive
optical Kerr effect (n2 > 0), SPM introduces a negative frequency shift in the leading half of the
pulse (denoted R) and a positive-frequency shift in the trailing half (denoted B). The pulse is chirped,
but its shape is not altered. If the chirped wave in (6) travels in the linear dispersive medium depicted
in (a), the pulse will be compressed since the blue-shifted half catches up with the red-shifted half. (c)
If the medium is both nonlinear and dispersive, the pulse can be compressed, expanded, or maintained
(creating a solitary wave), depending on the magnitudes and signs of the GVD and SPM. This
illustration shows a solitary wave created by a balance between negative GVD and positive SPM.

The soliton process may be visualized via the mechanical analog illustrated by the
cartoon in Fig. 23.5-6. Here, the heavy car represents the central portion of the optical
pulse. It alters the surface of the ground, assumed to be elastic, much like the intense
pulse peak alters the refractive index of the medium. The fast sports car, which is
analogous to the trailing side of the pulse, is slowed down by the inclination created
in the surface. The slow bicycle, which is analogous to the leading side of the pulse, is
accelerated by the down-sloped surface. The result of this self-sustained process is that
the three members of the team travel at the same velocity, and maintain the distances
that separate them.

о =
Figure 23.5-6 Transportation analog of the soliton.

Solitons have a characteristic pulse profile and level of intensity for which the effects
of SPM and GVD are balanced. For these pulses, the chirping effect of SPM perfectly
compensates the natural pulse expansion caused by the GVD. Any slight spreading
of the pulse enhances the compression process, and any pulse narrowing reduces the

1132 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

compression process, so that the pulse shape and width are maintained. Solitons can
be thought of as the modes (eigenfunctions) of the nonlinear dispersive system. A
mathematical analysis of this phenomenon is based on solutions of the nonlinear wave
equation that governs the propagation of the pulse envelope, as described subsequently.
However, we first present a simple derivation of the soliton condition.

Soliton Condition

An expression for the soliton condition is obtained by equating the sum of the phases
introduced by SPM and GVD to zero, within an incremental distance Az. As described
earlier in this section, a pulse traveling through a nonlinear medium exhibiting the
optical Kerr effect undergoes SPM, which introduces a quadratic phase modulation
exp(j¢t?), with © = 2nglpkoAz/7$, where Ip and то are the pulse peak intensity
and width, respectively, and nz is the optical Kerr coefficient. Also, as described in
Sec. 23.3, СУБ in a linear dispersive medium introduces a phase shift at?/7@, where
the chirp parameter а = Az/zp = 28” Az/7j, and where (” is the material dispersion
coefficient and |zo| is the dispersion length (see Table 23.3-1).

The condition that the pulse travel as a soliton is that the two phase factors are equal

in magnitude and opposite in sign, so that
6=-5, (23.5-12)
То
or, equivalently,
B"
kon2lp = ——5. (23.5-13)
70 Soliton Condition (Phase)
This expression in turn is equivalent to
2, = —20, (23.5-14)
Soliton Condition (Length)
which indicates that the GVD dispersion length must equal the nonlinear character-
istic length. Stated differently, the phase shift introduced by SPM over a propagation
distance equal to twice the GVD dispersion length |zo| is unity (—kon2Io2z9 = 1).

We may alternatively derive this condition by thinking of the medium as a periodic
sequence of localized SPM elements separated by pulse-spreading elements (GVD) of
widths Az, as illustrated in Fig. 23.5-7. The scheme is identical to the pulse-relaying
system described in Exercise 23.3-2. In fact (23.5-12) may be derived from (23.3-23)
in the limit as Az > 0.

An expression for the soliton condition can also be cast in terms of the pulse ampli-
tude Ао, where Ig = |Ao|?/27 and 77 is the electromagnetic impedance of the medium.
The result is written in terms of the product of the peak pulse amplitude Ap and the
temporal width то,

Аото = V —B"/7, (23.5-15)
Soliton Condition (Area)

where
я = kone/2n = пп2/ Лой (23.5-16)

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1133
А
SPM GVD SPM GVD 5РМ GVD
тэ
2S 71
a ee
0
<
= a(Z)
a5 4
==
iS) 8 0 Zz
Qa, —
Figure 23.5-7 Simple model for a medium with negative GVD and positive SPM.
is a nonlinear coefficient that serves as another material parameter. Note that ^/ and 3”
are assumed to have opposite signs. Thus, the product Аото of the peak amplitude and
width is a constant determined by the ratio of the parameter 6”, which describes GVD,
and the parameter -y, which describes SPM. For a given material, the product Аото is
fixed, which has the following implications:

= The pulse peak amplitude Ag is inversely proportional to the pulse width то.

= The pulse peak power is inversely proportional to то.

= The pulse energy density {J(t)dt is inversely proportional to то, so that a soliton

of shorter duration must carry greater energy.

By solving the nonlinear wave equation that governs pulse propagation in a medium
exhibiting both SPM and GVD, it will be shown subsequently that one of the solutions
is the soliton pulse

|A(t)| = |Ao| sech(t/79), (23.5-17)

Soliton Envelope

where sech(-) = 1/ cosh(-) is the hyperbolic-secant function illustrated in Fig. 23.5-8.
This symmetric bell-shaped function has the following characteristics:

= Peak amplitude = Ао

= FWHM width of amplitude profile = 2.63 то

= Area under amplitude profile = 27 Аото

= Intensity I(t) « | Ao|? sech?(t/79); width тины = 1.76 то
The Nonlinear Slowly Varying Envelope Wave Equation
To describe the propagation of an optical pulse in a nonlinear dispersive medium
exhibiting both GVD and SPM, we begin with the wave equation in (5.2-25) and (22.1-
3),

1 д? 0?
2 _
У — 9] = Мор (Pr. + Pru) ’ (23.5-18)

1134 — CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
Figure 23.5-8 Comparison of a sech function
ТЕУНМ and a Gaussian function of the same height and
h width (FWHM).
/ №
7 \ Gaussian
0 t
where €(r,t) is the electric field, Ф, (г, t) is the linear component of the polarization
density, which is governed by the medium dispersion, and Py, = 4y)€3 is the
nonlinear component of the polarization density, which is assumed to be nondispersive.
Bringing the linear term from the right-hand side to the left-hand side of (23.5-18) and
rewriting the equation in the Fourier domain, we obtain
[V? + B?(w)] Е = -ио Ра, (23.5-19)
where 3(w) is the propagation constant in the linear medium and Е = E(r,w) and
Py, = Py.(v,w) are Fourier transforms of E(r,t) and Py, (r,t), respectively. In the
absence of nonlinearity, (23.5-19) reproduces the Helmholtz equation (5.3-16).

We consider a plane-wave optical pulse traveling in the z direction with central

angular frequency wo and central wavenumber до = 3(wo) = во /с,

€ = Re{A(z,t) explj(wot — Boz)]}, (23.5-20)
and assume that the complex envelope A is a slowly varying function of ¢ and z (in
comparison with the period 27/w, and the wavelength 27/0, respectively).

Using three assumptions: (1) slowly varying envelope, (2) weak dispersion, and (3)
small nonlinear effect, it will be shown below that the envelope A(z, t) satisfies the
differential equation

D, 9?А [oO 19
= + АРА (55+) ^=0. (23.5-21)
4п Ot Oz v Ot Nonlinear
SVE Wave Equation
where v = 1/8’ is the group velocity, D, = 27” is the dispersion coefficient, 3’
and В” are the first and second derivatives of 8(w) with respect to w at w = wo, and
7 is given by (23.5-16). For a linear medium y= 0, and the linear SVE wave equation
(23.3-24) is reproduced.

[] *Derivation of the Nonlinear SVE Wave Equation. We begin with the nonlinear Helmholtz
equation (23.5-19). Substituting Е = A(z,w — wo) exp(—jGoz) as well as Ри, = Амь(2, м —
wo) exp(—j Boz), and defining Q = w — wo, we obtain

0 . ,
E + 8) [A(z,w) ехр(—7602)] = — Иов? Ад, (2, 9) exp(—j Boz). (23.5-22)
We now simplify (23.5-22) using a number of approximations:
и Since w = wo, the w? factor on the right-hand side of (23.5-22) can be approximated by 2.
= When the SVE approximation (4? /dz?)[A exp(—j 80z)] = [—j280dA/dz — 83 A] exp(—j Boz)
is applied, (23.5-22) becomes
[-72Ва/а=] A + [8? (мо + Q) — 86] А = обо Аз, (23.5-23)

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1135

= Assuming weak dispersion, 3?(wo + Q) — 68 = 289 [В( + Q) — Bo]. Further assuming а

three-term Taylor-series expansion, В (ло +2) = Bo + B’Q 4 18" 9?, (23.5-23) becomes
128) A + 24, (98' + 1928") A = oA 23.5-24
— 52807 + Bo (Q5' + 5 В") = — Ио ANL- (23.5-24)
и Since Py, = 4x) 63, Фу, contains components near the frequencies wo and Зал. Retaining
only the term near wo, we write Py, = Re{Anz(z, t) exp[j (wot — 8oz)]}, where Anz (z, Е) isa
slowly varying envelope. Using (23.5-20) and (22.3-3a), it follows that
Ан, = 3x®) | АРА. (23.5-25)
We then transform (23.5-24) back to the time domain, using the fact that jQ.A(z, 2) and —0? A(z, 0)
are equivalent to 0A/0t and д? А/дР. Finally, using (23.5-25), we obtain the nonlinear SVE wave
equation (23.5-21).

This result may also be obtained if we assume that the nonlinear medium is approximately linear
with a propagation constant 8 (42) Д В, where ДВ = (wo/co)n2T. We take the intensity I = | A|? /2n
to be sufficiently slowly varying so that it may be regarded as time-independent. The Fourier analysis
that led to the differential equation (23.3-24) for the linear medium is then simply modified by adding
a term proportional to AGA. This contribution produces the additional term 7 [АР A, whereupon
(23.5-21) emerges. и
The Nonlinear Schrédinger Equation
Equation (23.5-21) must be satisfied by the complex envelope A(z,t) of a plane-
wave optical pulse traveling in the z direction in an extended nonlinear dispersive
medium, with group velocity v, dispersion parameter В”, and nonlinear coefficient
y. As previously noted, a solitary-wave solution is possible if 6” < 0 (i.e., the medium
exhibits negative GVD) and y > 0 (.е., the optical Kerr coefficient nz > 0).

It is convenient to rewrite (23.5-21) in terms of dimensionless variables by normal-
izing the time, distance, and amplitude to the scales то, 220, and Ag, respectively:

™ п 15 the pulse width

вх = то /28" is the dispersion length of the linear dispersive medium for this

pulse width

= Ay = (—6//)1/2 /то is the pulse peak amplitude that satisfies the soliton condi-

tion (23.5-15).
Using a retarded frame of reference, and defining the dimensionless variables
t—z/v Zz A
pole ee р. А (23.5-26)
TO 22 Ао
the nonlinear SVE wave equation in (23.5-21) becomes
10? .д
= + We tice =0, (23.5-27)
2 Nonlinear Schrédinger Equation
which is recognized as the nonlinear Schrodinger equation.
Fundamental Soliton
The simplest solitary-wave solution of (23.5-27) is obtained by assuming a space-time
separable function of the form (2,1) = T(t) exp|jZ(z)], where T(t) and Z(z) are

1136 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
real functions. By direct substitution in (23.5-27), and using a separation-of-variables
approach, this leads to two differential equations: 2/(z) = 9 and J’(t) = 2(9 — 92)Т,
where is a constant. Assuming that J = J’ = 0 at |t| > со, and J = 1 and J’ = 0 at
t = 0 (the pulse peak), these ordinary differential equations may be solved by direct
integration to yield T(t) = sech(t) and Z(z) = 12. The normalized amplitude is then
given by
w(z,t) = sech(t) exp(jz/2) , (23.5-28)
and this solution is called the fundamental soliton. It corresponds to an envelope
t—2z/v ,
A(z, t) = Ap sech{ ——— ] exp (72/420) (23.5-29)
то Fundamental Soliton
that travels at velocity v without altering its shape. This solution is achieved if the
incident pulse at z = 0 is
A(0,t) = Ao sech (t/79). (23.5-30)
Higher-Order Soliton
The fundamental soliton is but one of a family of solutions of the nonlinear Schrodinger
equation with solitary properties. Consistent with the initial pulse ~)(0, t) = Nsech(t),
where № is an integer, is a solution known as the N-soliton wave. Such a wave
propagates as a periodic function of z with period z, = 7/2, called the soliton period,
which corresponds to a physical distance z, = л|2| = (m/2)7@/|B”|. At = 0 the
envelope A(0, #) is then a hyperbolic-secant function with peak amplitude № Ад, which
is N times greater than that of the fundamental soliton. As the pulse travels, it contracts
initially, then splits into distinct pulses that subsequently merge, and eventually it
reproduces the initial pulse at z = z, and multiples thereof.
The N = 2 soliton serves as an example. It has a normalized amplitude given by
cosh 3t + 3647" cosh +
а? 23.5-31
vt) cosh 4t + 4cosh2t+3cos4z ( )
whose magnitude is illustrated in Fig. 23.5-9.
N=1 N=2
5/р ol i 5/5
| С
р | р CLS f
- =”
2 0 2 10 2 0 2 1/0
Figure 23.5-9 Propagation of the fundamental (IV = 1) soliton and the N = 2 soliton.

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1137

The periodic compression and expansion of the multi-soliton wave is accommodated
by a periodic imbalance between the pulse compression, which results from the chirp-
ing introduced by self-phase modulation, and the pulse spreading caused by group
velocity dispersion. The initial compression has been used for the generation of subpi-
cosecond pulses.
Soliton-Soliton Interaction
When two solitons separated by some time delay are launched into the nonlinear
medium, their shape and time separation are altered as if they experience attractive or
repulsive forces pulling them together or separating them. For example, two identical
separated fundamental solitons are initially attracted as they travel through the medium
and their time separation is reduced until they collapse into a single pulse, whereupon
they experience repulsive forces that separate them again into two pulses. The process
is repeated periodically with a period

Ly = w exp(T/270) 20, (23.5-32)
where T is the initial center-to-center separation, 7) is the width of the individual
soliton, and 20 is the GVD dispersion length. This result can be obtained by solving
the nonlinear Schrédinger equation with the appropriate boundary condition. As an
example, if 7 = 1079, so that the pulses are well separated and only their tails interact,
Гр = 46629, which is quite large. However, this effect can be significant in long optical
fibers since it can impose restrictions on optical fiber communication systems that use
solitons to represent bits, as described in Sec. 25.2E.
EXAMPLE 23.5-2. Solitons in Optical Fibers. Ultrashort solitons have been generated in
glass fibers at wavelengths in the anomalous dispersion region (A, > 1.3 ит), where the GVD is
negative. They were first observed in a 700-m single-mode silica-glass fiber using pulses from a
mode-locked laser operating at a wavelength A, = 1.55 um. The pulse shape closely approximated
a hyperbolic-secant function with то = 4 ps (corresponding to Tpwum = 1.767 = 7 ps). At this
wavelength the dispersion coefficient is ОД» = 16 ps/km-nm (see Fig. 10.3-5), corresponding to
В" = D,/2n = (-^2 /с.)Рх/2т = —20 ps?/km. The refractive index п = 1.45 and the nonlinear
coefficient ny = 3.19 x 10-29 m?/W, corresponding to y = (7/A,)n2/n = 2.48 x 10-16 m/V?
(where 7 = 1» /п = 260 9). The amplitude Аз = (|8"|/) 1/2 /то = 2.25 x 108 V/m, corresponding
to ап intensity Го = AZ /2n = 10° W/cm’. If the fiber area is 10 ym?, this corresponds to а power of
about 100 mW. The soliton period is z) = л2о = 774 /2|8”| = 1.26 km.
ПОНИ
Soliton Generation and Maintenance
To excite the fundamental soliton, the input pulse must have the hyperbolic-secant
profile with the appropriate amplitude-width product Аото, as specified in (23.5-15).
A lower value of this product will excite an ordinary optical pulse, while a higher
value will excite the fundamental soliton, or possibly a higher-order soliton, with
the remaining energy diverted into a spurious ordinary pulse. When the initial pulse
has a different profile or is chirped, the resulting pulse can, under certain conditions,
evolve into a fundamental or higher-order soliton after a distance equal to a few soliton
periods.

If the medium is lossy, the pulse power is gradually dissipated so that the nonlinear
effect becomes weaker and dispersive effects dominate, which leads to pulse broaden-
ing and loss of the soliton nature of the pulse. In optical fibers, this problem may be
mitigated by the use of distributed Raman amplification (see Secs. 15.3D and 22.3B) to
overcome absorption and scattering losses. Lumped amplification can also be effective
if the amplifier spacing is well within the soliton period z,.

1138 — CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

Because of their unique ability to maintain their shape and width over long propaga-
tion distances, optical solitons have the potential for transmitting digital data through
optical fibers at higher rates, and for longer distances, than is currently possible with
linear optics (see Sec. 25.2E). Optical solitons with durations of a few tens of pico-
seconds have been successfully transmitted through many thousands of kilometers of
optical fiber.

Soliton Lasers
Optical-fiber lasers have also been used to generate picosecond solitons. One version
is a single-mode fiber in a-ring resonator configuration (Fig. 23.5-10). The fiber is
a combination of an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (see Sec. 15.3C) and an undoped
optical fiber that provides the pulse shaping and soliton action. Pulses are generated
by making use of a phase modulator to achieve mode locking. An integrated version
makes use of a laser-diode pump, such as InGaAsP, and an integrated-photonic phase
modulator.
о
Ритр Output
Phase foo) Figure 23.5-10 An optical-fiber soli-
modulator C) ©® ton laser.
Undoped fiber — Erbium-doped
(pulse shaping) fiber amplifier
Dark Solitons
A dark soliton is a short-duration dip in the intensity of an otherwise continuous wave
of light. Dark solitons have properties similar to the “bright” solitons described earlier,
but can be generated in the normal dispersion region (Ло < 1.3 ит in silica optical
fibers). They exhibit robust features that can be garnered for optical switching.
Analogy Between Temporal and Spatial Solitons
The optical solitons described in Sec. 23.5B are analogous to the spatial solitons (self-
guided beams) described in Sec. 22.3B. Spatial solitons are monochromatic waves that
are localized spatially in the transverse plane. They travel in a nonlinear medium with-
out altering their spatial distribution, as a result of a balance between diffraction and
spatial self-phase modulation in accordance with the nonlinear Schrédinger equation,
х РА OA
У + y|A)?A + j— =0, (23.5-33)
4т Ox Oz Nonlinear Beam Diffraction
where y = лп2/Айо and ng is the optical Kerr coefficient. Equation (23.5-33) is
equivalent to (22.3-11).

The nonlinear Schrddinger equation that describes temporal solitons in nonlinear
dispersive media (23.5-21) may be rewritten in the moving frame (t/ = t—z/v, 2’ = z)
as

О, @A OA
——— + APA + j— =0, (23.5-34)
4т Ot Oz Nonlinear Pulse Dispersion

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1139
where y = лп2/Апо. This is identical to (23.5-33) with time t playing the role of
the transverse spatial coordinate т, and the dispersion coefficient —D, (which gov-
erns pulse dispersion) playing the role of the wavelength (which governs beam
diffraction). It is therefore evident that temporal solitons are formal analogs of spatial
solitons. In fact the term soliton refers to generic solutions of the nonlinear Schrédinger
equation, describing pulses that propagate without change; they may be temporal or
spatial.

Spatiotemporal Solitons and Light Bullets
A spatiotemporal soliton is a combined temporal and spatial soliton, 1.е., a pulsed
beam that maintains its spatial and temporal profiles as it travels through a nonlinear
medium exhibiting the optical Kerr effect (see Fig. 23.5-11). In this case, the temporal
broadening associated with negative (anomalous) dispersion and the spatial spreading
resulting from diffraction are simultaneously compensated for by self-phase modula-
tion and self-focusing that ensue from a positive nonlinear optical Kerr effect. The
partial differential equation describing these three phenomena is a combination of
(23.5-33) and (23.5-34),
А D,@A OA
УРА + == + y|APA+j— =0. (23.5-35)
Ат An Ox Oz Nonlinear Diffraction
& Dispersion
A necessary condition for generating spatiotemporal solitons is the equality of the
dispersion length |zo| = 774 /|D_| and the diffraction length го = 7W(/A so that
79/Wo = (A/|Dv|)"?.
| — cT(Z) =
Wo
Е Е о Е
Л ge т. —>|cT9|<- Сто
(а) (b)
Figure 23.5-11 (а) Spatial and temporal spreading of a pulsed beam as a result of propagation in
a linear dispersive medium. (6) A spatiotemporal soliton is a pulsed beam that maintains its spatial
and temporal profiles as it propagates in a nonlinear medium.
*C. Supercontinuum Light
Supercontinuum light has an ultrabroad continuous spectrum and is of high brightness.
Supercontinuum generation (SCG) is implemented by transmitting an ultrashort
optical pulse of high peak power (a pump) through a nonlinear medium with spe-
cial dispersive properties; examples of such media are dispersion-shifted, dispersion-
flattened microstructured, and photonic-crystal optical fibers (PCFs). Supercontinuum
light sources with spectra stretching from the mid infrared to the extreme ultraviolet
have been demonstrated.
Depending on the details of the source, several nonlinear mechanisms, including
self-phase modulation (SPM), stimulated Raman scattering (SRS), four-wave mixing

1140 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
(FWM), and the soliton self-frequency shift (SSFS), may contribute individually or
jointly to SCG. These nonlinear effects are sensitive to the sign of the medium disper-
sion at the central wavelength Ло of the pump pulse and to the relative location of the
zero-dispersion wavelength \,, of the medium. The widest SCG spectra are obtained
when Ао is close to Azp. It was the availability of nonlinear PCFs with Л»ь close to the
wavelength of the Ti:sapphire laser that first made SCG practical.
A brief description of the principal nonlinear mechanisms that contribute to SCG
follows; Fig. 23.5-12 provides schematic illustrations of these processes.
Input ЕЕ
pulse j 9 8
Nonlinear Ao № №
fiber <
zQ
Ze
А 3 Azp Azp
о
Spectrally => Sofiton
broadened| Ва SPM SRS SPM i
light 85 д | | $355 4 FWM FWM \
BE SRSY
500 1000, (am) 1500 500 1000. (mm)? 500 1000 (om)
(a) (b) (с)
Figure 23.5-12 Principal nonlinear mechanisms for supercontinuum generation (SCG) via
spectral broadening of an ultrashort pulse transmitted through a nonlinear dispersive fiber. (a)
Self-phase modulation (SPM) combined with stimulated Raman scattering (SRS). (5) Soliton self-
frequency shift (SSFS). (c) Four-wave mixing (FWM).
= Self-phase modulation (SPM) is the principal mechanism for producing SCG
in nonlinear optical fibers with normal dispersion (D) < 0) at the pump central
wavelength Ло, since in this case solitons cannot be formed. As discussed in
Sec. 23.5A, SPM results in pulse chirping, which in turn causes spectral broad-
ening. A chirp coefficient a corresponds to spectral broadening by the factor
V1+a?. For a medium of length Г, and optical Kerr coefficient nz, the chirp
parameter is а = L/zy,, where zy; = (2nzIoko) 1 is the nonlinear characteristic
length of the Kerr medium and Jp is the peak pulse intensity.
= Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) broadens the spectral distribution fur-
ther, toward longer wavelengths, since it results in a frequency downshift (see
Secs. 14.5C, 15.3D, and 16.3C).
= The soliton self-frequency shift (SSFS) originates from intrapulse stimulated
Raman scattering (SRS). When Ло is close to Azp the combined SPM/SRS broad-
ens the spectrum into the anomalous region, creating conditions suitable for soli-
ton formation. Optical solitons generally experience a downshift of their carrier
frequency, toward longer wavelengths, which increases with pump power.
= Four-wave mixing (FWM) can also contribute to SCG. In a microstructured
fiber that has two widely separated, zero-dispersion wavelengths, with Ло lying
between them, the dominant nonlinear mechanisms for spectral broadening are
SPM and FWM. The SPM process broadens the pump pulse, enabling the phase-
matching conditions for FWM to be met. This generates new light at both lower
and higher frequencies, yielding SCG with double-peaked spectra. With sufficient
broadening, the two FWM peaks may merge into a single flat distribution.

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1141
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 23.5-3. High-Energy Solitons Generated т a Photonic-Crystal Rod. The
soliton pulse energy Е = Ася fI(t) dt can be maximized by making use of a photonic-crystal
rod with large effective mode area Ася. By virtue of the soliton condition specified in (23.5-15)
and (23.5-16), the soliton intensity is given by I(t) = (Ао? /2n) sech?(t/7o), where |Ao|” /2n =
|B"| №/2тпэто. Since [> sech (t/t) dt = 27», the soliton pulse energy can be written as

FN2T0 Soliton Energy
А 36-cm-long photonic-crystal rod with an effective mode area Ася = 2300 pzm?, driven by a mode-
locked, Er?+-doped fiber laser that provides a sequence of 360-fs, 500-nJ pulses at a wavelength of
Ао = 1550 nm and at a repetition rate of 1 MHz, generates optical solitons via SSFS. The output
of the rod is a train of 65-fs, 67-nJ optical solitons with a center wavelength of Ло = 1675 nm, а
repetition rate of 1 MHz, and an average power of tens of mW. This source is useful for three-photon
fluorescence microscopy (Sec. 14.5B).
«ПИ

*D. High-Harmonic Generation and Attosecond Optics

The previous sections of this chapter have considered ultrafast nonlinear phenomena
in the context of a dielectric medium in which the motion of bound electrons is charac-
terized by a weakly nonlinear ‘P—E relation (Fig. 22.1-1). Equation (22.1-1) provides a
Taylor-series expansion for the polarization density P in terms of increasing powers of
the electric field € that are responsible for second- and third-harmonic generation, as
well as a host of other parametric processes. When the optical field exceeds a certain
strength, however, this expansion is no longer viable and the light—matter interaction
exhibits new physical manifestations, such as atomic ionization (see Sec. 14.1A). This
domain is known as extreme nonlinear optics.

In high-harmonic generation (HHG), an infrared ultrafast pulse from a focused
laser beam serves to ionize a gas atom, creating a free electron in the process. The elec-
tron is accelerated by the exciting laser field, which imparts kinetic energy to it before it
is recaptured by its parent atom. The ensuing atom—electron recombination generates a
high-energy photon in the form of a burst of radiation with sub-femtosecond structure.
This same process takes place in a collection of atoms, which radiate coherently since
they are entrained by the waveform of the exciting laser. The discrete spectrum of the
emitted light comprises a frequency comb (Sec. 16.4E) that can contain hundreds of
harmonics of the exciting laser frequency, reaching into the extreme-ultraviolet (EUV)
region. The result is a tightly collimated beam of light that contains wavelengths far
shorter than that of the exciting laser. High-harmonic generation serves to convert
infrared (IR) light into extreme-ultraviolet (EUV) radiation and to generate attosecond
light pulses, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 23.5-13. At high gas pressures, the
HHG spectrum can contain thousands of harmonics of the exciting laser frequency and
extend well into the soft-X-ray (SXR) region.

Emissions from a single atom. А simplified semiclassical model that describes
the generation of HHG, known as the recollisional model, is illustrated in Fig. 23.5-
14. A gas atom is modeled as a single electron in a potential well [Fig. 23.5-14(a)].
The exciting laser field at the location of the atom is taken to be monochromatic with
angular frequency wo and period Т = 27/wo, and to be linearly polarized in the
x direction. The photon energy of the laser fiwp is much smaller than the ionization
energy of the atom W so ordinary photon absorption does not take place.

The HHG generation process follows three steps, in sequence:

1142 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
уу С “VV УТ Gas А.
4 ПР Pi 0°92 50
IR НИ DR 0199 ва НОУ
и Visible 90 ооо
Crystal
0 wo w 0 wp М 0% w 0 — I ж w
(a) SHG (b) HHG
Figure 23.5-13 Comparison between (a) second-harmonic generation (SHG) and (6) high-
harmonic generation (HHG), a process that generates pulses of EUV light on an attosecond timescale.
®<._ 2
E ЕЙ ЕН — ty ^^ = и.
м ®----
+
0 х E=<— —>&
tj | ti
T ty ty
|
t t t
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 23.5-14 Simplified three-step recollisional model for HHG. (a) A gas atom is modeled
as a single electron in the ground state of a potential well with ionization energy W. (b) An applied
optical field &(+) from an exciting laser alters the potential well and causes the electron to tunnel
into free space at time t;. (с) The free electron is accelerated in the +2 direction by the negative
optical field but reverses direction when the optical field becomes positive, returning back to the
ionized atom with increased kinetic energy Ех, at time t,.. (4) The electron recombines with the ion
and radiates an EUV photon of energy W-+ Е, that takes the form of a chirped pulse of radiation with
sub-femtosecond structure, as illustrated. Emissions from all atoms illuminated by the exciting laser
pulse add coherently.
= Step 1. During the first quarter of the optical cycle [Fig. 23.5-14(b)], the optical
field tilts the atomic potential well, thereby converting it into a potential barrier.
The electron tunnels through the barrier at time ¢;. Different atoms tunnel through
at different times.
= Step 2. The liberated electron is accelerated in free space by the exciting field, in
the +a direction away from the ionized atom [Fig. 23.5-14(c)]. When the field
reverses direction during the second and third quarters of the excitation cycle, the
electron reverses direction and is accelerated in the —х direction, back toward
the ionized atom. On its arrival at the atom, the atomic potential is tilted in the
opposite direction and the electron is endowed with increased kinetic energy Ех
as a consequence of its acceleration via the ponderomotive force.
= Step 3. When the electron collides with the ionized atom at time t,., recombina-
tion occurs and the electron falls into the potential well [Fig. 23.5-14(d)]. In the
process, a photon is emitted with energy hw = W-+ Е» >> hwo, in the form of a
burst of radiation with sub-femtosecond structure. The emitted EUV light has a
frequency far greater than that of the exciting IR light.
The preceding three steps are repeated for each cycle of the exciting laser field, re-
sulting in a periodic stream of radiation bursts. However, the process can also be
initiated on the half optical cycle opposite to that portrayed above, in which case the

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1143
liberated electron initially accelerates in the —х direction before turning around and
reuniting with the ionized atom. Symmetry dictates that both alternatives have equal
probability of occurrence in the collection of gas atoms, so that radiation pulses with
attosecond structure are generated twice per cycle, i.e., with period T/2 = m/w.
Such a periodic sequence of events exhibits a discrete spectrum whose frequencies are
spaced by 27/(7T/2) = 2% and whose amplitudes are determined from a Fourier-
series expansion (see Appendix A). The symmetry of the atom and the electric field
gives rise to components at odd harmonics of the exciting laser frequency that are
separated by 2wo, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 23.5-13(6).

Field to electron energy transfer. The energy imparted to the electron by the
exciting field during its foray away from its parent ion determines the characteristics
of the HHG. The kinetic energy acquired by an electron in an ionization—recombination
cycle may be calculated by determining its free-space trajectory. The optical field of the
exciting laser, E(t) = Eo coswot at x = 0, exerts a force её = moa on the electron,
resulting in an acceleration in the +a direction given by a(t) = (ебо/то) cos wot,
where —e and mv are the charge and mass of the electron, respectively. If the ionization
occurs at time t;, and the electron emerges with zero velocity [v(t;) = 0] at position
x = 0, the following equations govern the electron’s velocity v(t) = f a(t) dt, kinetic
energy E;,(t), and position x(t) = { v(t) dt at time t:

v(t) = vo|sin wot — sin wot], E,(t) = $m v7(t), (23.5-37)

x(t) = 5X0 [cos wot; — Cos wot — wo(t — t;) sin wot] , (23.5-38)
where уо = e€9/mowo and хо = 2eEo/ mows. These equations establish the trajectory
of the electron and the dependence of its kinetic energy Е; = &;,(t,-) on the ionization
time ¢; and the recombination time #..

1 1 1

uf ul

= 0.05 i | =
Е °° 0.075 5 °° 1 5 °°

Ye = | g

0 ZANS 0. 0

0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.25 0.5 0.75 1
(a) Time t/T (b) Ionization time 1;/T (©) Recombination time t,-/T
Figure 23.5-15 (а) Normalized trajectories x(t) /a of liberated electrons for various normalized
ionization times &/ Т within the first quarter of the laser cycle. Each trajectory begins at time t;/T
and terminates at the corresponding arrival time t,./7T. (b) Dependence of the normalized kinetic
energy on the normalized ionization time & /Т. (с) Dependence of the normalized kinetic energy on
the normalized recombination time ¢,./T.

Based on numerical solutions to these equations, which are displayed in Fig. 23.5-
15, the following observations emerge:

= From Fig. 23.5-15(a) it is clear that electrons freed at times ¢; in the first quarter

of the laser cycle (0 < t; < 7/4) arrive at the parent atom at times +. in the last
three quarters of the cycle (Т/4 < t, < T). The earlier an electron is freed in the
first quarter, the later it arrives in the last three quarters. In particular, an electron
freed at the very beginning of the cycle ($, = 0) arrives at the very end of the

1144 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
cycle (t, = T), and its excursion away from the parent atom is the greatest (а
distance то). Electrons freed at times ¢; in the second quarter of the exciting laser
cycle (Т/4 < t; < T/2) drift away and never return to the parent atom.

= From Fig. 23.5-15(b) it is evident that an electron ionized at t; = 0 returns with

zero net kinetic energy (Е, = 0). As & increases within the first quarter of the
laser cycle (0 < t; < Т/4), the kinetic energy of the returning electron increases
monotonically, reaching a peak value Enax = 0.794 том? (corresponding to a
velocity 1.26 vo) for & = 0.057, and then decreases to zero at t; = T/4. The
maximum kinetic energy Fax depends on the laser intensity Г = €2/2n, and
laser wavelength Ло in accordance with
Noe”
Emax = ТА? Г, то = 1.588-—"—, © 4.739 x 10 №5,  (23.5-39)
4 то с2

where 7, is the free-space impedance. The maximum kinetic energy is ргорог-
tional to the laser intensity and to the square of its wavelength.

= Figure 23.5-15(c) demonstrates that the electron’s kinetic energy Ех, as a function

of the recombination time ф,, which is also the photon emission time, is greater
than zero over the last three quarters of the exciting-laser cycle and exhibits a
maximum value at t, ~ 0.77. The full width of this curve is therefore ~ ЗТ,
corresponding to = 2 fs for an exciting wavelength of 800 nm.

Emissions from a collection of atoms. The characteristics of the generated HHG
beam are determined by the collective recombinations of many electrons with their
parent ionized atoms over a range of times within the same laser cycle. Figure 23.5-
15(c) demonstrates that the kinetic energy Ех of an arriving electron lies between 0
and Emax, indicating that the corresponding energy of its companion emitted photon
lies in the range between М and м + Emax. If the ionization probability were constant
and independent of the ionization time ¢; within the first quarter cycle, each generated
pulse would comprise a coherent superposition of recombination emissions from the
various atoms. Each such pulse would have an overall temporal duration < T/2 and
would be chirped by virtue of the dependence of the kinetic energy E,(t,) on the
recombination time ¢,, as depicted in Fig. 23.5-15(c). The frequency of the emitted
pulse, w(t,) = [м + E,(t,)]/h, is up-chirped for t, < 0.7 T and down-chirped for
t, > 0.7 T. The corresponding spectral width is Av = Enax/h = М/Т, where
М = Enax/hvo is the number of harmonics within the spectral band.

Pulse-compression techniques could be used to eliminate the attendant chirp and
render the pulse transform-limited (Sec. 23.2), in which case its temporal width would
be compressed to a value on the order of T/M. As an example, (23.1-10) reveals that a
transform-limited Gaussian pulse of spectral width Av (FWHM) has a corresponding
temporal width Trwry = 0.44/Ди = 0.447 /M, which represents a small fraction of
the laser period Т. The technology of attosecond optics offers methods for unchirping
HHG pulses, as well as for using suitable optical gating to isolate individual attosecond
pulses from such a pulse train.

EXAMPLE 23.5-4. HHG Attosecond Pulses т Ar Gas. An ultrafast Ti:sapphire laser
operated at a wavelength of \, = 800 nm emits femtosecond pulses that are amplified and focused
to an intensity J = 5 x 109 W/cm?. The infrared pulses impinge оп a gas of argon atoms (ionization
energy W = 15.78 eV) to produce HHG. The simplified three-step HHG model yields a maximum
electron excursion то = 2e€9/mgw2 = 1.94 nm and a maximum electron kinetic energy Enax =
то А? I = 94.8 eV [see (23.5-39)]. The maximum energy of an emitted photon is thus W+ Emax =
110.6 eV, which corresponds to a wavelength of = 11.2 nm in the EUV. Since the exciting photon
energy is йо = 1.55 eV, the number of harmonics generated is М = Enax/fiwo = 61. The period of

23.5 ULTRAFAST NONLINEAR OPTICS 1145
the laser cycle is T = 2.67 fs so optimal pulse compression would yield a train of pulses of duration
T /61 = 43.8 attoseconds.

For very large values of the laser intensity, the probability of ionization is not
constant and independent of the ionization time ¢; within the first quarter cycle, аз
assumed above. Rather, a subset of ionization times, smaller than the full quarter cycle
and corresponding to larger field values, dominates. This in turn causes the duration of
the emissions to shrink below T/2 and gives rise to the generation of sub-femtosecond
pulses without the use of compression. However, compression techniques serve to
further shrink the temporal width of the pulses to their transform-limited value, which
is established by the overall spectral width.

To foster the constructive growth of the HHG light along the length of the gas
region, phase matching must be maintained, i.e., the phase velocities of the exciting
laser light and the HHG light must match (Sec. 22.2D). While the phase velocity of
the high-frequency HHG light is essentially equal to the free-space velocity со, the
phase velocity of the laser light is lower and depends on the gas pressure. One phase-
matching scheme involves guiding the laser light through a hollow-core waveguide
filled with the gas. While the guided laser light travels at the velocity of the guided
mode, the high-frequency HHG light is unguided and travels with phase velocity со.
In the absence of the gas, the velocity of the laser guided mode is greater than c, (as
the propagation constant is lower), but it can be reduced to c, by increasing the gas
pressure, thereby permitting phase matching to be achieved.

Aside from Ti?*:sapphire lasers, ultrafast УЪЗ+ :silica-fiber lasers with high repe-
tition rates are often used as sources to produce HHG. Coherent attosecond beams,
with hundreds of „У in individual harmonic components and pulse durations in the
attosecond domain, can be generated. Attosecond optics has myriad applications, par-
ticularly in spectroscopy and imaging. It is also useful for understanding chemical
reactions since the electrons that participate in such reactions move on that timescale.
Light travels at a speed of 0.3 nm/as, so it traverses the width of a water molecule
(0.3 nm) in | attosecond. The generation of HHG using lasers operating in the mid
infrared can, in principle, allow multiple re-encounters of the electron with its parent
ion, thereby promising the generation of sub-attosecond (zeptosecond) optical pulses.
HHG can also be elicited from solids. The character of such emissions from crystalline
solids differs somewhat from those elicited from gases because of the periodic crystal
structure of the material. In particular, the HHG depends on the polarization of the
incident radiation and the frequency combs generated contain even harmonics as well
as odd ones for band structures that effectively lack inversion symmetry. The sum of a
collection of EUV or SXR frequency combs with slightly different spectral spacings,
generated by sweeping the exciting-laser wavelength and averaging, can serve as a
quasi-supercontinuum source in these spectral domains. Attosecond radiation may also
be generated by free-electron lasers (Sec. 16.3F), but FELs are currently available only
at large-scale facilities.

Limitations of the model. Though highly oversimplified, the semiclassical analy-
sis presented here captures many of the essential features of HHG production and atto-
second pulse generation. Many simplifications and approximations have been made:
1) the atomic model incorporates only a single active electron; 2) though the electron
is assumed to tunnel through the potential barrier, it is treated as a classical particle
rather than as a quantum-mechanical wavepacket; 3) the ionization is taken to be
instantaneous and the effect of the Coulomb field associated with the resulting ionized
atom is ignored; 4) the analysis is one-dimensional; and 5) the field is assumed to
be linearly polarized. Advances in the field of attosecond optics have enabled the
development of more sophisticated models that reveal more subtle features of HHG.

1146 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
23.6 PULSE DETECTION

The measurement of an ultranarrow optical pulse is challenging since the fastest avail-
able photodetector is almost always too slow to carry out the task. Methods of effecting
such measurements rely primarily on the use of an ultrafast optical shutter (gate)
controlled by another, shorter reference pulse and a mechanism for introducing a con-
trollable time delay between the two pulses. The light transmitted through the gate is
measured as the process is repeated for different delays, thereby providing an estimate
of the pulse-intensity profile Г(+). To measure the pulse phase y(t), interferometric
approaches can be cleverly combined with nonlinear optical techniques.

In the spectral domain, the pulse is fully characterized by its spectral intensity S(v)
and spectral phase (и). These functions may be measured by the use of an optical
spectrum analyzer in conjunction with interferometric measurements. A challenging
aspect of ultrashort pulse detection is the fact that the optical components employed in
the measurement system unavoidably alter the optical pulse before measurement. Such
effects must be minimized by careful system design, or compensated by appropriate
post-detection signal processing.

A. Measurement of Intensity
Direct Photodetection
Ideally, the intensity profile of a short optical pulse may be directly measured by
making use of a photodetector whose response time is much shorter than the pulse.
In accordance with (19.1-4), the measured photocurrent 7,(t) is then proportional to
the pulse intensity I(t) via

ip(t) = RAI(t), (23.6-1)

Fast Detector

where R is the responsivity (A/W) of the detector and A is its active area (which is
assumed to be sufficiently small so that the optical intensity is sampled at the position
of the detector).

If the response time of the photodetector is not small in comparison with the pulse
duration, which is the usual case for ultrashort optical pulses, the photocurrent response
is a broadened and distorted version of the optical pulse. If h,(t) is the impulse
response function of the detector, where [h,(t) dt = К, then the photocurrent response
is given by the convolution integral

ip(t) = [16 hp(t т) ат, (23.6-2)

Arbitrary Detector

which has greater duration than the optical pulse. Other measures must then be used

to determine its true intensity waveshape /(t). It is apparent that (23.6-2) reduces to

(23.6-1) in the limiting case when the photodetector response time [the width of hp (t)]
is much shorter than the duration of the optical pulse [the width of Г(+)].

At the opposite extreme, when the optical pulse duration is much shorter than the
response time of the photodetector, (23.6-2) becomes

ip(t) = hp(t) А [16 ат, (23.6-3)
in which case the photocurrent takes оп the temporal profile of the detector’s impulse
response function, rather than that of the optical pulse. These three cases are illustrated
schematically in Fig. 23.6-1.

23.6 PULSEDETECTION 1147
h,(t) .
9 @ ob) © | \ PO a) 6) ©
SAA илл
' '
Figure 23.6-1 Response of a photodetector with impulse response function № р (#) to optical pulses
of (a) long; (6) intermediate; and (с) short duration. For short optical pulses, as illustrated in (с), the
photocurrent i,,(¢) follows p(t) rather than I(t).

Furthermore, if the photoreceiver circuitry has a time constant 7, that is longer than
the response time of the photodetector, with an impulse response function that is rect-
angular with h,(t) = 1/ть ‚ the photocurrent response is i,(t) © (1/ть) [ho(t) dt -
A J I(r) dr. This is a rectangular function of duration 7, that can be written as

. 1
ip(t) = — RA | I(r) dr. (23.6-4)
TR Slow Detector
The receiver then measures the area multiplied by the time integral of the intensity,
which is the energy of the optical pulse. The receiver then altogether lacks temporal
resolution and may be simply modeled as an integrator.

So, how might one measure the temporal profile of an ultrashort optical pulse,
whose duration is in the picosecond or femtosecond regime, by making use of a “slow”
photodetector, whose response time is a few tenths of a nanosecond at best?
Measurement of Short Pulse with Slow Detector and Fast Shutter
The temporal profile of a short optical pulse may be measured with a slow detector
by making use of a fast shutter (switch or gate). As illustrated in Fig. 23.6-2, the gate
opens for only a short time window during the course of the pulse, allowing a sample of
the pulse to be detected by the slow detector. The measurement is repeated by opening
the gate at different times, and a set of measured samples are used to estimate the
pulse intensity profile. Since electronically operated gates are not viable at speeds in
the picosecond or femtosecond range, we consider instead an optical gate controlled
by а reference optical pulse whose duration is much shorter than that of the measured
pulse (see Sec. 24.3C for a discussion of all-optical switches).

Ко a Slow — 'p a
detector
Gate Kw
о A] OWe-7) EI о >
Variable mol
delay

Wis) O77
Figure 23.6-2 Measurement of an optical pulse J(t) by use of an optical gate controlled by a far
shorter optical gating pulse W(t).
Two examples of optical gates used for the measurement of ultranarrow pulses are
displayed in Fig. 23.6-3.

1148 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
SHG
о PBS crystal
ОГО
ИИ
м око? | +
О ПОВ us
(a) Optical Kerr gate U(t) (b) SHG gate
Figure 23.6-3 (a) An anisotropic nonlinear Kerr gate. The reference pulse intensity [,.(t) =
\U,.(t)|? alters the Kerr-medium phase retardation, as explained in Sec. 22.3A. Since the test pulse
0 ($) is transmitted through a pair of crossed polarizers, with the Kerr medium sandwiched between,
it is modulated by the gating function W(t) х |U;,(t)|?. (6) А second-harmonic generation (SHG)
gate. The test pulse U(t) and the gating pulse U,.(t), which have orthogonal polarizations, combine
in a collinear Type-I configuration (see Prob. 22.2-3), generating a pulse at the second-harmonic
frequency with amplitude « U(t)U,(t), so that the gating function W(t) « U,(t).

Finally, we assess the effect of the finite switching time on the measurement resolu-
tion. If W(t) is the transmittance of the gate when initiated by a gating pulse at t = 0,
then when the gating action is delayed by time 7 the transmitted optical pulse intensity
is I(t)W(t — т). The delay т may be imparted either to the gating function W(t) ог
to the optical pulse itself, Г(+). When detected by the slow photodetector, the resultant
photocurrent is proportional to the area under the transmitted pulse,

ip(t) x frowe — тат. (23.6-5)
The measured photocurrent is thus proportional to the convolution of the optical pulse
and the window function. Hence, the temporal resolution of the measurement is equal
to the width of the window function W(t), which is governed by the gate/shutter
speed. Were the window function W(t) a delta function 6(t), the photocurrent would
be proportional to Г(т) and there would be no loss of resolution.
Single-Shot Pulse versus Pulse Train
The preceding method for measuring the shape of a short pulse with a slow detector
can be easily implemented if a periodic train of identical pulses is available. The
shutter is set at a different time delay 7 for each of a sequence of pulses, as illustrated
in Fig. 23.6-4, and the readings of the detector are recorded sequentially. The pulse
repetition rate must, of course, be sufficiently low so that the slow detector can recover
before encountering a subsequent pulse.
В В Г 1
——0 Ат — 2A 8 Ar
t
Figure 23.6-4 Measurement of a pulse intensity profile I(t) by sampling individual pulses of a
pulse train at time delays т = тДт, т = 0,1,2,... .

But what if a single-shot pulse is to be measured? This may be accomplished by
generating multiple copies of the pulse via a fan-out optical element (see Fig. 24.1-4).
As shown in Fig. 23.6-5, each copy is then subjected to a different time delay before

23.6 PULSEDETECTION 1149
transmission through a gate controlled by a gating pulse W(t). The use of an array of
detectors then permits [(¢) to be recovered for a single-shot pulse.

Bank of Array of
delays Gate detectors
| | Figure 23.6-5 Measurement of the intensity
; rofile I(t) of a brief single-shot optical pulse b
Single-shot аль в 2, optical fan-out device, followed by A
pulse 0) | | X bank of optical delays, an optical gate, and an array
of slow photodetectors.
Gating ; ' J
pulse W(t) * CH
Temporal-to-Spatial Transformation: Streak-Camera Principle
The fan-out and multiple-delay concept depicted in Fig. 23.6-5 may be implemented
optically by using an extended beam intercepted at an angle by a planar spatial detector
(e.g., an array detector or CCD camera), as illustrated in Fig. 23.6-6. A pulsed plane
wave traveling in the z direction has intensity [(t — z/c), so that a wave traveling at
an angle 9 with respect to the z axis has an intensity I(t — [a sin@ + zcos6]/c). If
this beam is intercepted by a spatial detector at the plane z = 0, it detects the intensity
I(t — [a sin 0] /с); hence, at position x the pulse is delayed by time т, = [x sin 0] /с.
Every detector element therefore sees its own delay, which implements the scheme
displayed in Fig. 23.6-5. If a shutter is used to take a snapshot at time $ = 0, the
detector reading at location x is proportional to [(—[x sin 0] /с). The result is that the
pulse shape I(t) is spatially recorded with a mirror-image profile, scaled such that an
incident pulse of duration то (spatial width сто) creates an image of transverse width
сто / sin @ at the plane of the spatial detector, as sketched in Fig. 23.6-6. As an example,
a pulse of duration то = 10 ps extends over a spatial width сто = 3 mm along the
direction of propagation; at an angle 6 = 30° this yields an image width of 6 mm at
the detector plane.
Spatial =
« Shutter detector Е =
р о Е Figure 23.6-6 Temporal-to-spatial transforma-
tS tion of an optical pulse by use of an oblique wave
and a spatial detector such as a CCD camera. The
streak camera makes use of this principle.
0
<

This is the principle underlying the streak camera. The pulsed light is “streaked”
in such a way that rays hitting different points on the extended spatial detector travel
different distances and therefore experience different time delays. Such a position-
dependent time delay may alternatively be introduced by transmitting the beam through
a glass wedge.

The shutter used in the system portrayed in Fig. 23.6-6 may be an optical Kerr
gate or a SHG gate, as schematized in Figs. 23.6-3(a) and (b), respectively. A partic-
ularly convenient implementation is the non-collinear Type-II SHG gate illustrated in
Fig. 23.6-7. The test and gating pulses take the form of orthogonally polarized oblique

1150 — CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
waves at angles 9 and —0 with respect to the 2 axis. Their wavefunctions are thus
U(t — [xsin 6 + zcos6]/c) and U,(t — [—x sin 0 + z cos 6@]/c), respectively, so that
the relative time delay is т, = [22 sin 6]/c at position x. The wave generated at the
second-harmonic frequency has a wavefunction proportional to the product U-U,., so
that the measured intensity is proportional to Г. Г.. As a result, the detected signal is
proportional to the intensity autocorrelation function G';(7,), as explained below.
Nonli 2
UO) crystal. . Spatial
he 0 detector
<
_ Second-harmonic
|—

и UOU,(0)
Figure 23.6-7 Measurement of a single-shot pulse by use of non-collinear Туре-П SHG
(Exercise 22.2-1) and time-to-space transformation (streaking). The detected signal is proportional to
the intensity correlation function С’ (ть).
Measurement of Intensity Autocorrelation
As indicated above, the measurement of an ultrashort optical pulse I(t) with a slow
detector is achieved by making use of a shorter optical pulse W (t) to control an optical
gate. When no such external gating pulse exists, the test pulse itself may be compressed
and used for this purpose. Or, a squared version of the test pulse obtained via SHG, for
example, can also serve this purpose since J?(t) is narrower than [(t). Higher-order
harmonic generation could be used to generate an even narrower pulse, although it
would be of lower intensity.

In circumstances when neither compression nor harmonic generation of the test
pulse is feasible, the test pulse itself may be used as the gating pulse. As illustrated in
Fig. 23.6-8, the photocurrent will then be proportional to the intensity autocorrelation
function, given by

акт) = [ror —T)dt = frome +7)dt. (23.6-6)
Intensity
Autocorrelation
I(t) Slow С)
о Gate hon —
о ! t DI(t-T, 0 >
‘ву A=) /\
|
Figure 23.6-8 Measurement of the intensity autocorrelation function С’; (т).

23.6 PULSEDETECTION 1151
Since I(t) is a real function of finite duration, G7(7) is a symmetric function that
decreases from a peak value G;(0) at 7 = 0, to zero at 7 = oo. The autocorre-
lation function of a pulse of arbitrary shape is a broader symmetric function. For
example, a Gaussian pulse of intensity J(t) = exp[—2(7/70)”), with width то, has
a (Gaussian) autocorrelation function G(r) сх ехр[- (т /то)?|, which may be written
as exp[—2(7/\/2 70)?], revealing that the width has broadened from то to М2 то.
Knowledge of the autocorrelation function is generally not sufficient to determine
the underlying function itself. This can be seen by noting that the Fourier transform
of G7(r) is |J(v)|?, where J(v”) is the Fourier transform of I(t) (see Sec. A.1 in Ap-
pendix A). Measurement of G';(7) thus permits the magnitude |J(v)| to be determined
but provides no information about the phase and hence cannot be used to completely
recover the complex envelope. An exception is the symmetric pulse, for which [(—t) =
I(t), since J(v) is then real and therefore has zero phase. However, if the mathematical
profile of a nonsymmetric function is known, the measurement of its autocorrelation
function does allow parameters such as its width to be estimated.
B. Measurement of Spectral Intensity
Optical Spectrum Analyzer
The spectral intensity $(v) = |A(v)|? of an optical pulse of complex envelope A(t)
may be measured by use of an optical spectrum analyzer, which is simply a bank
of spectral filters tuned to an appropriate set of frequencies/wavelengths. If a bank of
“slow” detectors is used to detect the energy in each of the spectral components, the
result of the measurement is the spectral intensity S(v). An optical implementation is
sketched in Fig. 23.6-9.
U i и 5 Z| Spatial
(2 Fourier (и) |? (и) ра ео
transform [2 | [|
Optical spectrum analyzer
(a) (0)
Figure 23.6-9 Measurement of spectral intensity with an optical spectrum analyzer. (a) System.
(b) Optical implementation using prisms.
It is generally not possible to retrieve the complex function A(t) from the magnitude
of its Fourier transform |A(v)| in the absence of phase information. An exception is
the case of a symmetric pulse, whose Fourier transform is real.
Interferometric Spectrum Analyzer
The spectral intensity $(v) of an optical pulse may also be measured by use of an inter-
ferometric spectrum analyzer, as portrayed in Fig. 23.6-10. Recall from Sec. 12.2B
that a Michelson interferometer may be used as a Fourier-transform spectrometer.
When a pulsed optical beam of complex wavefunction U(t) is split into two beams
by a 50/50 beamsplitter, and one beam is delayed by time 7 with respect to the other,
the combined beam has optical field (1/v2)[U(t) + U(t—7)] and intensity (1/2)|U(¢) +
U(t—T)|?.

1152 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
Slow
detector
00 U(t) + ба
Variable у
т х
<
(а) (d)
Figure 23.6-10 Interferometric measurement of the pulse spectral intensity. The interferogram is
used to determine the autocorrelation function of the pulse envelope G_4(7), whose Fourier transform
is the spectral intensity.
When detected with a “slow detector,’ the result is a function of the optical delay,
Ru(r) =} [u(t + Ue) Pat
=1 ] ООРаЕ + 4 ] |U(t — т)? dt + Ве ] U*(t)U(t — r)dt. (23.6-7)
Substituting U(t) = A(t) exp(j271t) leads to
Ryu (rT) = Ga(0) + Re {Gy (rT) exp(—j2mvpT) }
= Ga(0) + |Ga(r)| cos [2av97 — arg {G.4(r)}], (23.6-8)
where
Galt) = ] At (t)A(t — r)dt (23.6-9)
is the autocorrelation function of the complex envelope, which is the inverse Fourier
transform of the spectral intensity $(v) = | A(v)|?. The measurement Ry (т) is a fringe
pattern of visibility |G.4(7)|/G~(0). This scheme permits us to determine G4 (rT)
through careful analysis of the visibility and location of the fringes. The interferometer
therefore provides the same information as does the conventional spectrum analyzer.
C. Measurement of Phase
The full characterization of an optical pulse involves knowledge of the complex enve-
lope, i.e., the magnitude and phase of the wavefunction U(t) = ./I(t) exp|j2mvot +
p(t)], or equivalently the magnitude and phase of its Fourier transform V(v) =
/ S(v) exp[jw(v)]. The techniques presented in Sec. 23.6A provide means for
determining the intensity J(¢), but not the phase y(t). The approaches set forth in
Sec. 23.6B, on the other hand, offer ways of measuring the spectral intensity S(v), but
provide no information about the spectral phase (и). Only under special conditions
can knowledge of the magnitudes of a function and its Fourier transform serve to fully
characterize that function, absent knowledge of the associated phases.

We now consider measurements that are directly sensitive to the phase y(t) and the
spectral phase (и). Techniques for phase measurement are often based on interferom-
etry since the intensity at the interferometer output is highly sensitive to the difference
between the phases of the interfering waves.

23.6 PULSEDETECTION 1153
A conventional method for measuring phase is optical heterodyning, a form of
temporal interferometry (see Sec. 2.6B). In this approach the complex wavefunction
of the test pulse U(t) = \/I(t) exp[j27vot + y(t)] is mixed with a known reference
pulse U,.(t) = \/I,(t) exp[j2av,t+ y,(t)], which has a central frequency v, = м f.
The intensity of the sum is given by
|U(t) + U,(t)/? = I(t) + 1,(t) +2\/T(t)I,(t) cos [20 ft + y(t) — y(t)]. (23.6-10)
Equation (23.6-10) is a generalization of (2.6-12), in which the phases y(t) and ф, (Е)
were arbitrarily set to zero. Equation (23.6-10) represents an interferogram whose beat
frequency f (fringes per second) is the difference between the central frequencies, and
whose time-varying phase is [ф,(#) — y(t)]; both the beat frequency and phase may be
readily extracted from the interferogram. For ultrashort pulses, however, the detector
is always “slow” so that the temporal features of the interferogram are unfortunately
averaged out. Temporal interferometry, including heterodyning, therefore cannot be
marshaled for the measurement of y(t).
Spectral Interferometry
Interferometry can yield useful results, however, if it is carried out in the Fourier do-
main. In an approach known as spectral interferometry, the pulse U(t) is delayed by
a fixed time т and added to a known reference pulse U,.(t) of the same frequency. The
Fourier transform of the sum, U(t — т) + U,(t), is then measured with a slow detector
to create an interferogram, as illustrated in Fig. 23.6-11. If the Fourier transforms of
U(t) and U,(t) are V(v) = /S(v) exp [jv(v)] and V,(v) = V/Sr(v) exp [jvr(v)),
respectively, the spectral interferometer measures the interferogram
JV (бет + V,(v)|? = S(v) + S,(v)
+2y/S(v)S,(v) cos [2rtv + Y,(v)—Y(v)]. — (23.6-)
This is a fringe pattern (in frequency) whose visibility is determined by the spectral
intensity S(v) and whose fringe locations are governed by the phase difference 1, (и) —
w(v). The measurement therefore yields full information about У (р), and hence about
The duality between temporal and spectral interferometry may be understood by
noting that (23.6-10) and (23.6-11) are identical in form, with $ and и playing dual
roles, while the delay 7 plays the role of the frequency difference f. The principal
challenge of spectral interferometry is the necessity for a known reference pulse.
aA
Fixed /
delay 4
U(t) Ut) Fourier ` ¢
т transform \
0 и
U,(0) Detector
Figure 23.6-11 A spectral interferometer generates an interferogram in the Fourier domain.

1154 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
Self-Referenced Spectral Interferometry
The test pulse cannot be used as its own reference since the phase term in (23.6-11)
vanishes if w,(v) = (и). One method of working around this problem is to use a
frequency-shifted version of the test pulse as a reference, 1.е., by choosing V,(v) =
V(v + f). A block diagram of the configuration is presented in Fig. 23.6-12. The
resultant interferogram is
VvjeP7" Уи =SV)+SU+f)
+2,\/S(v)S(v + f) cos [2пти + (и + f) - (|, (23.6-12)
from which the phase difference w(v + f) — w(v) may be estimated. If the frequency
shift f is small, this phase difference may be used as an approximation of the derivative
dy) /dv, which may then be integrated to provide the phase w(v).
Fixed
delay
00) U1) Fourier |
т transform А
ое РИ
Frequency
shift
Figure 23.6-12 Self-referenced spectral interferometer.
Nonlinear Interferometry
As discussed in Sec. 23.6B, an interferometric spectrum analyzer can provide full
information about the spectral intensity S(v) of a pulse, although it provides no in-
formation about the spectral phase. The block diagram in Fig. 23.6-10 demonstrated
that conventional time-domain interferometry achieves this by measuring of the area
under the function |U(t) + U(t — T)|? [see (23.6-7)].
One way to extract phase information is to make use of a nonlinear interferometer.
If the integrand in (23.6-7) is squared prior to detection, the interferometer extracts the
area under the function |[U(t) + U(t — 7)]?|?, as illustrated by the block diagram
in Fig. 23.6-13. The squaring operation may be implemented by second-harmonic
generation in a nonlinear optical crystal.
2) И
К /
и
< Variabl $1 — —
х 0 т
Figure 23.6-13 Nonlinear interferometer.

23.6 PULSEDETECTION 1155
The nonlinear function analogous to Ry(r) in (23.6-7), denoted RO (т), is then
given by
(2) 2|?
R?)(r) = [о (9 +U(t—7)| | dt. (23.6-13)
To demonstrate that RY (т) contains the phase information we seek, we substitute
U(t) = A(t) exp(j271ot) into (23.6-13), and separate terms with frequencies 0 , м,
and 21. This leads to
RY? (7) x Colt) + 4Re {Си(т)е "т } + 2Re {С5(т)е "т" } — (23.6-14)
with
Со(т) = [Pea + [re —r)dt+4 ] I(t)I(t - r)dt
= 2G1(0) +4G7(r), (23.6-15)
Ст (т) = лол — т) Е + I(t — т) dt, (23.6-16)
Съ(т) = ] [A*(t)A(t — Рав (23.6-17)
where G(T) is the intensity autocorrelation function defined in (23.6-6). The function
RO (т) is seen to be the sum of three terms: a nonoscillatory term Со(т) and two os-
cillatory terms at frequencies vg and 21, which may be separated by Fourier analyzing
2
(т). a |
The first term depends on the intensity autocorrelation function G7(7) and has no
phase dependence. The two other terms depend on both the pulse intensity and phase.
The overall function is bounded by an upper envelope with maximum value RO) (0) =
16 | I°(t)dt = 16G,(0) and a lower envelope with minimum value RO (0) = 0.
Its asymptotic value is R (оо) = Op(oc) = 2f I?(t)dt = 2G7(0). The ratio
RY (r)/ В (со) therefore goes from a peak value of 8 at 7 = 0 to an asymptotic
value of unity at = со.
As a specific example, we examine a linearly chirped Gaussian pulse with time
constant то and chirp parameter a, for which
Со(т) = 2G7(0) [1 + 2exp(—17/75)] , (23.6-18)
Ci(r) = 2G7(0) exp[—(3 + a7)? /4то] cos (ат? /2то), (23.6-19)
Co(r) = G7(0) exp[—(1 + a”)r?/79] . (23.6-20)
The normalized function R\? (r)/R\” (oo) is plotted in Fig. 23.6-14 for three values of
the chirp parameter a. It is evident that the profile of the interferogram, particularly the
point at which the oscillatory terms vanish, is highly sensitive to a, and can therefore
be used to estimate the chirp parameter from experimental data.
Though there is no general procedure for estimating the pulse phase from the mea-
surement of Re) (т), the measurement can nevertheless can be used to verify known
models for pulse amplitude and phase as well as to estimate unknown parameters.

1156 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS
8 8 8 т
6 6 6 it
4 4 4 Я
2 2 ) 2
rant x

° 2 -1 1 > aI © 2 -1 0 1 ram © > -1 0 1 27/1
Figure 23.6-14 Normalized intensity autocorrelation function RY (r)/ Re ) (со), plotted against
the normalized time delay 7/7, for a chirped Gaussian pulse with three different values of the chirp
parameter a.
Nonlinear Interferometry with Nonlinear Detectors. In an alternative implemen-
tation of the nonlinear interferometer depicted in Fig. 23.6-13, the squaring operation
is carried out by the detector itself. This is accomplished by use of a detector based
on two-photon absorption, e.g., a photodiode with a bandgap energy greater than the
photon energy, but smaller than twice the photon energy (see Prob. 19.1-5). In such
a detector, the photocurrent is proportional to the square of the intensity (since it
absorbs pairs of photons). As a result, such a nonlinear interferometer would measure
the function

RO (r) = ] (В + U(t — r)|*dt, (23.6-21)
which, like (23.6-13), contains information about the pulse distribution and width.

*D. Measurement of Spectrogram

As set forth in Sec. 23.1A, the spectrogram S(v,7) of an optical pulse U(t) is a ите-
frequency representation given by the squared magnitude of the Fourier transform of
the pulse, as seen through a moving window (gating function) W(t):

S(v,T) = |Ф(,т)?; B(v,7) = Гоби —T)exp(—j2mvt)dt. (23.6-22)
Consequently, the spectrogram may be measured by transmitting the pulse U(t)
through an optical gate controlled by a time-delayed gating function W(t — т), and
measuring the spectrum of the product U(t)W(t — т) with a spectrum analyzer at each
time delay 7, as depicted schematically in Fig. 23.6-15. An optical implementation
relies on a moving mirror to introduce the time delay, an appropriate optical gate, and
an optical spectrum analyzer such as that shown in Fig. 23.6-9. The technique is known
as frequency-resolved optical gating (FROG).

In the absence of a sufficiently short gating function W(t), the pulse U(t) itself,
or а related pulse, may be used for this purpose. The relation between W(t) and U(t)
depends on the nature of the optical gate, as illustrated by the following examples:

= For a second-harmonic generation (SHG) gate (see Fig. 23.6-7) with input waves

U(t) and U(t—7) at the fundamental frequency, the wave at the second-harmonic

23.6 PULSEDETECTION 1157
и
Gate
U(t) Ут) | Fourier S(v,7)
transform
Variable
delay Detector т
W(t) W(t-7)
Figure 23.6-15 Measurement of the spectrogram S(v,7) by frequency-resolved optical gating
(FROG).
frequency is proportional to the product U(t)U(t — т), so that W(t) < U(t) and
O(v,T) = [rout — T)exp(—j2mvt)dt. (23.6-23)
The time-frequency function in (23.6-23) is known as the Wigner distribution
function. The overall optical system that implements the block diagram in
Fig. 23.6-15 is depicted in Fig. 23.6-16(a) and the system is known аз the SHG-
FROG. This system is suitable for single-shot measurement, as discussed earlier.
= For a polarization-based optical Kerr gate [Fig. 23.6-3(a)], W(t) is proportional
to the pulse intensity Г(#) so that W(t) x I(t) = |U(t)|? and
&(v,7) = | U(t)|U(t — т)? exp(—j2rvt)dt. (23.6-24)
When this gate is used to implement the block diagram in Fig. 23.6-15, the
system is called the polarization-gated FROG (PG-FROG), which is illustrated
in Fig. 23.6-16(6).
Ut) S| 0 Spectrum
М analyzer
=e U(t)U(t-7) Z|
U(t-7)
(a) SHG-FROG [>
<7 | ст SHG gate
Ul
© \ \ Spectrum analyzer
Ш > «a | vo len?
(b) PG-FROG Optical Kerr gate [> №
\/ fer
Figure 23.6-16 Two implementations of frequency-resolved optical gating (FROG): (a) Second-
harmonic generation FROG (SHG-FROG); (5) Polarization-gated FROG (PG-FROG).
Other nonlinear optical configurations have also been devised, including a gate based
on third-harmonic generation, which corresponds to the gating function W(t) «
U?(t), and a gate based on self-diffraction, which corresponds to W(t) хх [U*(t)]?.

1158 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

Estimation of the Pulse Wavefunction from the Spectrogram

In its many variations, the spectrogram S(v,7) provides a 2D “picture” that may be
used to characterize the optical pulse by displaying signatures of its key features.
With some difficulty, it may also be used to estimate the complex wavefunction (both
magnitude and phase) of the pulse U(t).

The estimation of U(t) from the measured spectrogram S(v,7) is not straightfor-
ward. A general expression for S(v,7), as determined for any of the gating systems
considered above, may be written in the form

S(v,T) =|®(v,7)|?; ®(v,7) = ic T) exp(—j2mvt)dt, (23.6-25)
where g(t,7) = U(t)W(t — т) and W(t) is related to U(t). As we have seen previ-
ously, W(t) = U(t) for the SHG-FROG, and W(t) = |U(t)|? for the PG-FROG.

If the complex function ®(v,7) were known, U(t) could be readily estimated as
follows. Form the inverse Fourier transform of ®(v,7) with respect to и at each т, to
obtain:

g(t,7) = Jew т) ехр(72пи ар. (23.6-26)
Given that g(t,7) = U(t)W(t — т), compute the wavefunction U(t) by integration
over T:

J o(t-r)ar = Гоби — т)ат = U(t) [we —т)ат x U(t). (23.6-27)
The proportionality constant is the area under the window function, which is unknown.
Nevertheless, this analysis will prove useful in the following paragraph.

The problem of estimating &(v,7) from its measured absolute square, S(v,7) =
|®(v,7)|?, is known as а missing-phase problem. Many algorithms have been devised
for addressing this kind of problem. One iterative approach follows the steps illustrated
by the following diagram:

$ Ф
—) | I фи
arg{®}
sr

1. Beginning with the measured spectrogram S(v,7), determine the magnitude
|®(v,7)| = [S(v,7)]!/2. With an initial guess for the missing phase, arg{®(v,7)},
use the procedure discussed in the previous paragraph [inverse Fourier transform
®(v,7) with respect to и and integrate over т] to estimate U(t) up to an unknown
proportionality constant.

2. Using this value of U(t), compute ®(v,7) to obtain a revised estimate of the
unknown phase arg{®(v,7)}; use this together with the measured magnitude
|®(v,7)| to obtain a new and better estimate of U(t).

3. Repeat the process until it converges to a pulse wavefunction U(t) that is consis-
tent with the measured spectrogram.

An example displaying the outcome of this procedure for SHG-FROG is provided

in Fig. 23.6-17.

READINGLIST 1159
0 05 1 0 05 I
ое | Е ag A 12 05
> | 05 fh 0 ~

Е № | им Е

| | о rr
0.4 № = >| п 04
| 05 оз
ОЗ pe сей Bol 2 03
40-20 0 20,40 0.6 0.8 т Л) —0 -20 0 20 Go
(a) (b) (c)

Figure 23.6-17 (a) Measured spectrogram $)(A,7) of a 21/2-cycle, 41/2-fs optical pulse with

a central wavelength = 0.85 um obtained by SHG-FROG. (5) Estimated temporal and spectral

characteristics of the pulse. (с) The SHG-FROG spectrogram computed from the pulse in (6) is

approximately the same as the measurement in (a). Note that the wavelength regions of peak response
in (a) and (c) are at the second harmonic. (Adapted from A. BaltuSka, M. S. Pshenichnikov, and

D. A. Wiersma, JEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. 35, pp. 459-478, Figs. 17(a), 17(b),

and 18 ©1999 IEEE; К. Trebino, ed., Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating: The Measurement of

Ultrashort Laser Pulses, Kluwer, 2000, figure on associated CD-ROM.)

READING LIST

Ultrafast Optics

See also the reading lists in Chapters 5, 6, and 22.

D. T. Reid, C. M. Heyl, R. R. Thomson, R. Trebino, G. Steinmeyer, H. H. Fielding, R. Holzwarth,
7. Zhang, P. Del’Haye, T. Stidmeyer, С. Mourou, T. Tajima, О. Faccio, F. J. М. Harren, and
G. Cerullo, Roadmap on Ultrafast Optics, Journal of Optics, vol. 18, 093006, 2016.

A. M. Weiner, Ultrafast Optics, Wiley, 2009.

K. E. Oughstun, Electromagnetic and Optical Pulse Propagation. 2: Temporal Pulse Dynamics in
Dispersive, Attenuative Media, Springer-Verlag, 2009.

K. E. Oughstun, Electromagnetic and Optical Pulse Propagation. 1: Spectral Representations in
Temporally Dispersive Media, Springer-Verlag, 2007.

J.-C. Diels and W. Rudolph, Ultrashort Laser Pulse Phenomena, Elsevier, 2nd ed. 2006.

С. Rulliére, ed., Femtosecond Laser Pulses: Principles and Experiments, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed.
2005.

Е. X. Kartner, ed., Few-Cycle Laser Pulse Generation and Its Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2004.

R. Trebino, ed., Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating: The Measurement of Ultrashort Laser Pulses,
Springer-Verlag, 2000.

$. А. Akhmanovy, У. A. Vysloukh, and А. $. Chirkin, Optics of Femtosecond Laser Pulses, American
Institute of Physics, 1992.

T. R. Gosnell and A. J. Taylor, eds., Selected Papers on Ultrafast Laser Technology, SPYE Optical
Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 44), 1991.

W. Rudolph and B. Wilhelmi, Light Pulse Compression, Harwood, 1989.

D. Strickland and G. Mourou, Compression of Amplified Chirped Optical Pulses, Optics Communi-
cations, vol. 56, pp. 219—221, 1985.

Optical Solitons

S. Boscolo and C. Finot, eds., Shaping Light in Nonlinear Optical Fibers, Wiley, 2017.

Г. М. Binh, Optical Multi-Bound Solitons, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2016.

G. Fibich, The Nonlinear Schrédinger Equation: Singular Solutions and Optical Collapse, Springer-
Verlag, 2015.

G. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, Academic Press/Elsevier Press, 5th ed. 2013.

1160 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

М.Е 5. Ferreira, Nonlinear Effects in Optical Fibers, Wiley, 2011.

Г. Е Mollenauer and J. P. Gordon, Solitons in Optical Fibers: Fundamentals and Applications,
Academic Press/Elsevier, 2006.

T. Dauxois and M. Peyrard, Physics of Solitons, Cambridge University Press, 2006.

A. Hasegawa and M. Matsumoto, Optical Solitons in Fibers, Springer-Verlag, 3rd ed. 2003.

Y. S. Kivshar and G. P. Agrawal, Optical Solitons: From Fibers to Photonic Crystals, Academic
Press, 2003.

N. N. Akhmediev and A. Ankiewicz, Solitons: Nonlinear Pulses and Beams, Chapman & Hall, 1997.

Г. Е Mollenauer and К. H. Stolen, The Soliton Laser, Optics Letters, vol. 9, pp. 13-15, 1984.

Г. Е Mollenauer, К. H. Stolen, and J. P. Gordon, Experimental Observation of Picosecond Pulse
Narrowing and Solitons in Optical Fibers, Physical Review Letters, vol. 45, pp. 1095-1098, 1980.

Supercontinuum Light Generation

К. В. Alfano, ed., Supercontinuum Laser Source: The Ultimate White Light, Springer, 3rd ed. 2016.

G. Genty, A. T. Friberg, and J. Turunen, Coherence of Supercontinuum Light, in T. D. Visser, ed.,
Progress in Optics, Elsevier, 2016, vol. 61, pp. 71-112.

J. М. Dudley and J. В. Taylor, eds., Supercontinuum Generation in Optical Fibers, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2010.

J. M. Dudley, G. Genty, and S. Coen, Supercontinuum Generation in Photonic Crystal Fiber, Reviews
of Modern Physics, vol. 78, pp. 1135-1184, 2006.

High-Harmonic Generation and Attosecond Optics

C. D. Lin, A.-T. Le, C. Jin, and H. Wei, Attosecond and Strong-Field Physics: Principles and Appli-
cations, Cambridge University Press, 2018.

М. Sivis, М. Taucer, С. Vampa, К. Johnston, A. Staudte, A. Yu. Naumov, О. М. Villeneuve, С. Rop-
ers, and P. B. Corkum, Tailored Semiconductors for High-Harmonic Optoelectronics, Science,
vol. 357, pp. 303-306, 2017.

F. Calegari, G. Sansone, S. Stagira, C. Vozzi, and M. Nisoli, Advances in Attosecond Science, Journal
of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics, vol. 49, 062001, 2016.

U. Huttner, K. Schuh, J. V. Moloney, and S. W. Koch, Similarities and Differences Between High-
Harmonic Generation in Atoms and Solids, Journal of the Optical Society of America B, vol. 33,
рр. C22-C29, 2016.

Р.Н. Bucksbaum, Sources and Science of Attosecond Light, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 26, no. 5,
pp. 28-35, 2015.

$. Hadrich, A. Klenke, J. Rothhardt, М. Krebs, A. Hoffmann, О. Pronin, У. Pervak, J. Limpert,
and A. Tiinnermann, High Photon Flux Table-Top Coherent Extreme-Ultraviolet Source, Nature
Photonics, vol. 8, pp. 779-783, 2014.

Т. Popmintchev, M.-C. Chen, О. Popmintchev, P. Arpin, $. Brown, $. AliSauskas, G. Andriukaitis,
T. Baléiunas, О. О. Miicke, A. Pugzlys, A. BaltuSka, В. Shim, $. Е. Schrauth, A. Gaeta,
С. Hernandez-Garcia, L. Plaja, A. Becker, А. Jaron-Becker, М. М. Murnane, and Н. С. Kapteyn,
Bright Coherent Ultrahigh Harmonics in the keV X-Ray Regime from Mid-Infrared Femtosecond
Lasers, Science, vol. 336, рр. 1287-1291, 2012.

A. Себя, О. С. Yost, Т. К. Allison, A. Ruehl, М. Е. Fermann, I. Hartl, and J. Ye, Direct Frequency
Comb Spectroscopy in the Extreme Ultraviolet, Nature, vol. 482, pp. 68—71, 2012.

Z. Chang, Fundamentals of Attosecond Optics, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2011.

G. Sansone, L. Poletto, and M. Nisoli, High-Energy Attosecond Light Sources, Nature Photonics,
vol. 5, pp. 655-663, 2011.

T. Popmintchev, M.-C. Chen, P. Arpin, M. M. Murnane and H. C. Kapteyn, The Attosecond Nonlinear
Optics of Bright Coherent X-Ray Generation, Nature Photonics, vol. 4, pp. 822-832, 2010.

Е. Krausz and М. Ivanov, Attosecond Physics, Revs. of Modern Physics, Vol. 81, рр. 163—234, 2009.

P. B. Corkum and Z. Chang, The Attosecond Revolution, Optics & Photonics News, vol. 19, no. 10,
pp. 24-29, 2008.

P. В. Corkum and Е. Krausz, Attosecond Science, Nature Physics, vol. 3, pp. 381-387, 2007.

P. Jaeglé, Coherent Sources of XUV Radiation: Soft X-Ray Lasers and High-Order Harmonic Gener-
ation, Springer-Verlag, 2006.

PROBLEMS 1161

Н. С. Kapteyn, M. М. Murnane, and I. Р. Christov, Extreme Nonlinear Optics: Coherent X Rays from
Lasers, Physics Today, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 39-44, 2005.

M. Wegener, Extreme Nonlinear Optics: An Introduction, Springer-Verlag, 2005.

P. B. Corkum, Plasma Perspective on Strong-Field Multiphoton Ionization, Physical Review Letters,
vol. 71, pp. 1994—1997, 1993.

A. McPherson, G. Gibson, H. Jara, Ч. Johann, Т. $. Luk, I. A. McIntyre, К. Boyer, and С. К. Rhodes,
Studies of Multiphoton Production of Vacuum-Ultraviolet Radiation in the Rare Gases, Journal
of the Optical Society of America В, vol. 4, pp. 595-601, 1987.

М. H. Burnett, H. A. Baldis, M. С. Richardson, and С. О. Enright, Harmonic Generation in CO,
Laser Target Interaction, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 31, pp. 172-174, 1977.

Generation of Ultrafast Petawatt Pulses

Е. Cartlidge, The Light Fantastic, Science, vol. 359, pp. 382—385, 2018.

В. Le Garrec, О. М. Papadopoulos, С. Le Blanc, J. Р. Zou, С. Chériaux, P. Georges, Е. Druon,
Г. Martin, L. Fréneaux, A. Beluze, М. Lebas, Е. Mathieu, and P. Audebert, Design Update and
Recent Results of The Apollon 10 PW Facility, SPIE Proceedings, vol. 10238 (High-Power, High-
Energy, and High-Intensity Laser Technology III), 2017.

X. Zeng, K. Zhou, Y. Zuo, Q. Zhu, J. Su, X. Wang, X. Wang, X. Huang, X. Jiang, D. Jiang, Y. Guo,
М. Xie, S. Zhou, Z. Wu, J. Mu, H. Peng, and Е. Jing, Multi-Petawatt Laser Facility Fully Based on
Optical Parametric Chirped-Pulse Amplification, Optics Letters, vol. 42, рр. 2014—2017, 2017.

A. Heller, Lighting a New Era of Scientific Discovery, Science & Technology Review, pp. 4-11,
January/February 2014.

PROBLEMS

23.1-1 Superposition of Two Gaussian Pulses. A transform-limited Gaussian pulse is added to
a chirped Gaussian pulse with chirp parameter a but otherwise identical parameters. Derive
expressions for the intensity, phase, spectral intensity, spectral phase, and chirp parameter
of the superposition pulse.

23.1-2 The Hyperbolic-Secant Pulse. Consider a pulse with complex envelope sech(t/7), where
sech(-) = 1/cosh(-) and 7 is a time constant.

(a) Show that the width of the intensity function is Tawyy = 1.767.

(b) Show that the spectral intensity S(v) сх sech?(x?rv) and that the FWHM spectral
width is Av = 1.786/т.

(c) Compare these results with those for the Gaussian pulse provided in Appendix A.

23.2-1 Thick-Prism Chirp Filter. А thick prism is used as a chirp filter. The angle of incidence
is selected to satisfy the Brewster-angle condition in order to minimize reflection loss. The
apex angle a is selected such that the incident ray and the central deflected ray are symmetric
with respect to the prism. Under these two conditions, show that the angle of deflection 04
satisfies the condition d@,/dn = —2, and that the chirp coefficient can be expressed as
b= —4(n — N)?£A,/mc?. Show that this chirp coefficient is greater than that for the thin-
prism chirp filter (Example 23.2-4) by a factor of 4/a”, given that all other parameters are
the same.

23.2-2 Bragg-Grating Chirp Filter. Design a Bragg-grating chirp filter for Gaussian pulses of
central frequency и, = 300 THz (corresponding to a free-space wavelength of 1 jm) and
Tewum = 0.44 ps. The filter is to have a chirp coefficient b = (2 ps)”. Specify the dimensions
of the grating and the maximum and minimum pitch of its periodic structure to ensure that
all spectral components of the pulse are reflected by the grating.

23.3-3 Propagation of a Rectangular Pulse Through an Optical Fiber. A rectangular pulse
of width 7 travels through an optical fiber, which is modeled as a chirp filter with chirp
parameter b = D,z/m [see (23.3-5)]. Show that after a sufficiently long distance 2, the
pulse alters its shape from a rectangular function to a sinc function. Derive an expression
for the modified pulse width.

1162 CHAPTER 23 ULTRAFAST OPTICS

23.3-4 Temporal Imaging with a Time Lens. An optical pulse of width т, and arbitrary shape
travels a distance d, through a fiber with positive GVD, where it is modulated by a phase
factor exp(j¢t?); it subsequently travels a distance dy through a fiber of the same material.
The width of the final pulse is 72. Assuming that d; and 4> are much larger than the
dispersion length 2о of the fiber, show that the new pulse will be a delayed replica of the
original pulse, with time magnification то /ти = 45 / Ат, if the condition 1/4: +1/45 =1/f
is satisfied. Here, f = —7/¢D, is the focal length of the phase modulator for this medium
(¢ is negative and f is positive). This result indicates that the system is equivalent to a
temporal imaging system.

23.5-1_ Mixing of Pulsed Chirped Waves and Chirp Amplification.

(a) Three pulsed collinear plane waves with central angular frequencies ил, we, and из =
ил + We are mixed in a second-order nonlinear medium with nonlinear optical coef-
ficient d. The medium is dispersive and has indices of refraction пл, n2, and пз and
group velocities v,, v2, and v3 at the three central frequencies. The three pulses are
chirped with chirp parameters ал, а2, and аз. What should be the relation between ал,
а2, and аз for efficient three-wave mixing. Hint: Assume that energy conservation and
momentum conservation (phase matching) relations are satisfied at all instants of time.

(b) Demonstrate that the chirp parameter of the signal and/or the idler may be greater than
that of the pump. Discuss possible applications of this “chirp amplification” process.

*23.5-2 Pulsed Three-Wave Mixing in a Medium with Group Velocity Dispersion (GVD). De-
rive the three-wave-mixing coupled-wave equations (23.5-3) for a medium with GVD. You
may use the following procedure. Begin with the Helmholtz equation with a source equal
to the Fourier transform of 8 = 11,0?Pyx_/Ot?, where Py = 2482. Express the field
€ as a superposition of three waves with distinct central frequencies and slowly varying
envelopes (SVEs), and convert the Helmholtz equation into three separate equations at the
three frequencies. Simplify these equations using the SVE approximation, weak dispersion,
and a three-term Taylor-series expansion of the propagation coefficient. Use an inverse

Fourier transform to convert the equations back to the time domain.

23.5-3 Dependence of Soliton Characteristics on Group Velocity Dispersion. Compare the char-
acteristics of two fundamental solitons of equal energy traveling in two different extended
media (e.g., optical fibers) with GVD coefficients О» = 20 and 10 ps/km-nm, but with
otherwise identical optical properties (same refractive index and same Kerr coefficient n2).
Compare the soliton widths, peak amplitudes, areas under amplitude profiles, and soliton
distances.

23.5-4 Solitons in an Optical Fiber. Show that the product of the peak intensity and dispersion
length for the fundamental soliton is a constant: Jo|zo| = 0/472. For a silica-glass
fiber with Kerr coefficient nz = 3.19 x 10-20 m?/W, determine the peak intensity Го for
a dispersion distance |20| = 30 km.

23.6-1 Measurement of a Gaussian Pulse. A Gaussian transform-limited optical pulse with a 50-
fs FWHM and a central frequency corresponding to a wavelength of 800 nm is measured
with the help of the intensity correlator illustrated in Fig. 23.6-8.

(a) Determine the shape and FWHM of the measured autocorrelation function.

(b) It has been suggested that the measurement can be improved if one of the pulses, say the
one traveling in the upper branch, is deliberately stretched by passage through a silica-
glass fiber. If the pulse is to be stretched by a factor of 5, what length of fiber is required
to do so, given that silica glass has a dispersion coefficient О» = —110 ps/km-nm at
800 nm? What would be the width of the modified correlation function after insertion
of the fiber?

(c) Consider applying this notion to the nonlinear interferometer displayed in Fig. 23.6-13,
with the fiber placed in the upper branch. Describe the possible merits and difficulties
of using this approach as a tool for pulse measurement.

23.6-2 Interferometer with a Two-Photon Absorbing Detector. An interferometer that uses
a two-photon absorber as a detector (Prob. 19.1-5) provides a measurement of the function
RY (т) specified in (23.6-21). Compare this interferometer with a nonlinear interferometer
that makes use of a second-harmonic generator followed by a conventional detector, which
provides a measurement of the function RY (т) given in (23.6-13). Hint: Expand (23.6-21)
in a form similar to that of (23.6-14) and compare the different terms.

CHAPTER
ee
OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND
SWITCHES
24.1 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS 1166

A. Free-Space Refractive and Diffractive Interconnects
B. Guided-Wave Interconnects
C. Nonreciprocal Optical Interconnects
D. Optical Interconnects in Microelectronics and Computer Systems
24.2 PASSIVE OPTICAL ROUTERS 1178
А. Wavelength-Based Routers
В. Polarization- , Phase- , and Intensity-Based Routers
24.3 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1187
A. Space-Switch Architectures
B. Implementations of Photonic Space Switches
C. All-Optical Space Switches
D. Wavelength-Selective Switches
E. Time-Domain Switches
F. Packet Switches
24.4 PHOTONIC LOGIC GATES 1211
А. Bistable Systems
B. Principles of Optical Bistability
С. Bistable Optical Devices
The development of optical interconnects and photonic switches began in earnest in the 1980s under
the aegis of Bell Laboratories, an organization created by AT&T in 1925. Bell Laboratories became
part of Lucent Technologies in 1996, part of Alcatel-Lucent in 2006, and then part of Nokia in 2016.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1163

CSC
Interconnections and switches are essential components of distributed systems such as
communication systems and networks (telecom and datacom) and computing systems
(computer-com). As displayed in Fig. 24.0-1, the scale of the interconnection distances
in these different venues extend over a broad range: 1-100 km for telecom; 10-1000 т
for datacom; and 1-1000 cm for computer-com. The interconnection links may be
passive (fixed), or they may be active (reconfigurable) and controllable by switches.
tcc bees | | ООО

WAN MAN LAN Datacenters AOC rack-rack board-board chip-chip on-chip
a ОО ОО ОИ ООО ОО ОН
100 km 10 km 1 Кт 100 m 10m lm 10 ст lcm
Figure 24.0-1 Typical interconnection distances for telecom [wide-area networks (WANs) and
metropolitan-area networks (MANs)]; datacom [local-area networks (LANs), datacenters, and active
optical cables (AOCs)]; and computer-com [rack-to-rack, board-to-board, chip-to-chip, and on-chip
interconnects].

Optical fibers have emerged as the preferred medium for telecom and datacom
interconnects, and indeed many types of photonic switches have been developed to
support active links. The reach of optical-fiber technology has developed more slowly
for short-distance applications, yet optical interconnects and switches have continued
to make inroads in computer-com, including computer rack-to-rack, board-to-board,
chip-to-chip, and even on-chip links. The principal challenges in implementing short-
distance interconnects are the greater link density and the attendant higher dissipated
power density. While several decades of research in digital optical computing have
not yielded commercial products that are competitive with electronic computing, a
byproduct of this effort has been the development of a number of technologies for
optical interconnects and logic gates.

A generic interconnection system is displayed in Fig. 24.0-2. Light entering each
of a set of M points at the input is directed to one or several of a set of N points at
the output. If the connections are fixed and independent of the content of the incoming
light, the system is referred to as an interconnect. On the other hand, if the incoming
light is routed to different destinations that depend on its content, the system is called a
router. If the connections are reconfigurable, in response to an external control signal,
the system is called a switch.

eee
I i fw
1 1 Time Ро Direction
2 2
3 3
| Code Eom в
м № ро Pisce Polarization
"фт
Control
Figure 24.0-2 A generic NxM system may Figure 24.0-3 Attributes of an optical
function as a passive interconnect, a router, or beam that can be used for modulation, multi-
a switch. plexing, routing, and switching.
1164

CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES 1165

Light has multiple attributes, as illustrated in Fig. 24.0-3: position (space); time (for
optical pulses or specific sequences of optical pulses that form a code); wavelength (or
frequency); polarization; direction; intensity; and phase (for coherent waves). These at-
tributes serve as resources that can be used to enrich the interconnection and switching
fabric. When the different interconnection points schematized in Fig. 24.0-2 refer to
space, time, wavelength, or polarization, the system is called a space-domain switch
(or simply a space switch), a time-domain switch, a wavelength-domain switch, or a
polarization switch, respectively. For example, a time-domain switch may be engaged
to transfer a signal from one time slot to another, while a wavelength-domain switch
converts a signal from one wavelength to another. Switches controlled by an address
coded in each packet of incoming data are known as packet switches.

An interconnection for which an attribute, such as wavelength, of the incoming
light dictates the destination output ports is known as a passive optical router. Such
routers enable multiplexing: multiple data streams can be transported on a single link
by using one attribute as a distinguishing marker while modulating another attribute
to encode information. For example, the optical intensities of different wavelengths
in a single light beam may be modulated by different data streams that are ultimately
separated (demultiplexed) at the destination by means of a wavelength-sensitive pas-
sive optical router. The introduction of wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) has
substantially advanced modern optical fiber communication systems, as discussed in
Sec. 25.5B, and has motivated the development of special wavelength-based photonic
switches.

This Chapter

This chapter introduces the basic principles associated with optical interconnects, pas-
sive optical routers, photonic switches, and photonic logic gates. Many of the funda-
mental principles of optics and photonics introduced in earlier chapters find use here,
including Fourier optics and holography, guided-wave and fiber optics, semiconductor
optics, acousto-optics, electro-optics, nonlinear optics, and ultrafast optics.

Optical interconnects via free-space, planar photonic circuits, and optical fibers
are considered in Sec. 24.1. The input beams are directed to prescribed output ports
regardless of their attributes and the information they carry.

Passive optical routers are described in Sec. 24.2. Each input optical beam is
directed to one or more output ports based on beam attributes such as wavelength,
polarization, or intensity. Different wavelength components in a single beam may,
for example, be routed to separate output ports, in which case the device serves as
a wavelength-division demultiplexer. The inverse of this operation, in which beams
with different wavelengths are combined into a single optical beam, is implemented by
a multiplexer.

Photonic switches are considered in Sec. 24.3. The simplest example is an ON—
OFF switch that can be directed by a control signal to connect or disconnect two ports
(i.e., transmit or block a beam of light), or a switch that selectively directs a beam
to one of two possible locations, regardless of the data content or attributes of the
beam. Following an introduction to the types and properties of these switches, we
provide a brief overview of the different technologies used to implement them; these
include mechano-optic, electro-optic, semiconductor-photonic, thermo-optic, and all-
optical devices. Time-domain switches and packet switches are also described.

Photonic logic gates based on bistable optical devices are examined in Sec. 24.4.
These switches have memory so that the output takes on one of two (or several) values,
depending both on the current value and on the previous history of the input.

1166 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
24.1 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS

Digital signal-processing and computing systems contain large numbers of intercon-
nected gates, switches, and memory elements. In electronic systems, the intercon-
nections are effected by means of conducting wires, coaxial cables, or conducting
channels within semiconductor integrated circuits. Photonic interconnections may be
similarly realized by the use of optical waveguides with integrated-photonic or fiber-
optic couplers. Free-space light beams may also be used for interconnections, in which
microlenses or diffractive optical elements direct these beams. This latter option is not
available in electronic systems since electron beams require vacuum and cannot cross
one another without mutual repulsion.

Figure 24.1-1 illustrates a number of configurations for interconnects (also called
couplers). Each input port is connected to one or many output ports, and vice-versa.
For example, in the T-coupler or fan-out configuration, the input port is connected to
each of the output ports. In the 3-dB or star coupler, each input port is connected to
each and every output port.

oo e— eo

eo e— eo

e— ®— e—

®— eo

e— —

e— е—

Shift/ Reversal/ Crossover Perfect
Banyan crossover shuffle
T-coupler Fan-out Fan-in
(multicast)
3-dB coupler Projection Star coupler Bus coupler
Figure 24.1-1 Representative examples of interconnect configurations. (a) One-to-one. (b) One-
to-many or many-to-one. (c) Many-to-many.
Interconnection Matrix
The diagrams displayed in Fig. 24.1-1 are solely schematic connectivity diagrams;
they do not specify quantitative relations among the optical fields or intensities at the
connected ports. For linear coherent optical interconnects, the optical field U, (9) at the
éth output port (6 = 1,2,..., №) is related to the optical fields 00 at the input ports,
т = 1,2,..., М, via the superposition
М
Up? = У` ТО, (24.1-1)
m=1

where the weights { Тут } are complex numbers that define an interconnection matrix
T. For example, the 2 x 2 3-dB coupler shown in Fig. 24.1-1(c) is described by

24.1 OPTICALINTERCONNECTS 1167
ТЕ Е 4 (24.1-2)
МИ 1

and which harks back to the scattering matrix for ап ideal beamsplitter (7.1-18) and
the transmission matrix for phase-matched guided waves in coupled-mode theory (9.4-
11). For this device, the optical power carried in by one beam (in the absence of the
other) is divided equally between the two outgoing beams. Other interconnects may be
similarly described. The interconnection matrix of a cascade of interconnects may be

determined by making use of matrix multiplication, as described in Sec. 7.1A.

Since the light is assumed to be coherent, the phase relations between the incoming
beams and the phases introduced by the elements of the interconnection device play im-
portant roles. Indeed, interferometric effects are often used to redistribute the incoming
power among the output ports in a prescribed manner. If the light is incoherent, on the
other hand, then the intensity (and hence the power) at each output port is a weighted
superposition of the intensities (powers) at the input ports (see Sec. 12.3B):

M
PY) = S© | Tem|? PA. (24.1-3)
т=1
In this case, the powers at the output and input ports of а 3-dB coupler are related by
an interconnection matrix whose elements are all equal to 1/2.

Key performance specifications of practical couplers include the following power
ratios, usually expressed in dB [i.e., —10 log(1/power ratio)]:

= The insertion loss describes the port-to-port power transmittance, ideally 0 dB

for a lossless path.

= For a coupler distributing power among multiple output ports, the splitting ratio

is the ratio of the power at one output port to the power at all output ports. For
example, for an ideal 3-dB coupler, the splitting ratio is —3 dB.

= The crosstalk is the ratio of the undesired power received at an output port to the

input power directed to another output port(s).

= The excess loss is the ratio of the total output power to the total input power.
Nonreciprocal Interconnects: Isolators and Circulators
The designation of the ports of an interconnect as input or output ports implies a
specific direction of transmission — from input to output (from left to right in the
examples in Fig. 24.1-1). Certain interconnects are reciprocal, i.e., if the transmission
is directed instead from the output ports to the input ports, the interconnection matrix
remains the same. Otherwise, the interconnect is nonreciprocal.

Isolators. The simplest example of a nonreciprocal interconnect is a 1 x 1 unidirec-
tional link that transmits in only one direction, as illustrated in Fig. 24.1-2(a). This
is often implemented by using an optical isolator, much like a diode or a one-way
valve (see Sec. 6.4B). The performance of an isolator is specified by the insertion loss
(power transmittance in the forward direction in dB) and the reverse isolation (power
transmittance in the reverse direction in dB).

Multiport Nonreciprocal Interconnects. The input/output designation is not appli-
cable when a port plays a dual role, as transmitter and receiver. The interconnect is then
designated simply by the number of ports. Figure 24.1-2(5) and (с) are example of 3-
port interconnects using unidirectional links. These interconnects are used in duplex
(two-way) communication systems, as depicted in the 4-port interconnect in Fig. 24.1-
2(e). In another 4-port system, shown in Fig. 24.1-2(d), the connections between the
left and right ports are in the parallel configuration in the forward direction (left to
right), and in the cross configuration in the backward direction (right to left).

1168 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
(a) (b) (c) (d)

— —>

ee

= ©) <
Figure 24.1-2 (a) A 2-port unidirectional link (isolator). (6), (с) A 3-port interconnect using two
unidirectional links. (d) А 4-port nonreciprocal interconnect. (е) А 4-port interconnect for duplex
(bidirectional) communications.
Circulators. Another example of nonreciprocal interconnects is the optical circula-
tor. This is an interconnect with three or more ports connected by unidirectional links
pointing in the same direction. As illustrated in Fig. 24.1-3, the 4-port circulator is
equivalent to the interconnect in Fig. 24.1-2(d). Circulators find many applications in
communication systems and networks. They are used, for example, in optical add—drop
multiplexers (OADMs), as described in Sec. 24.2A (Fig. 24.2-3).
leo —&› о»

= } i Figure 24.1-3 A 4-port circulator repre-
— —, i \ sented by two equivalent configurations.
ук

А. Free-Space Refractive and Diffractive Interconnects
Refractive interconnects. Conventional optical components (mirrors, lenses, prisms,
etc.) are routinely used as interconnects in optical systems. Consider, as an example,
a simple imaging system in which a lens connects points in the object and image
planes. To appreciate the enormous density of such interconnections in a well-
designed imaging system, observe that as many as 1000 x 1000 independent points
рег mm? in the object plane are optically connected by means of the lens to a
corresponding 1000 x 1000 points per mm? in the image plane. Implementing
such connectivity electrically would require one million nonintersecting and suitably
insulated conducting channels рег mm?.

Standard optical components may be used to implement special interconnects, such
as shift, reversal, crossover, shuffle, fan-in, fan-out, star coupling, and projection, as
illustrated in Fig. 24.1-4 (see also Fig. 24.1-1). Bulk-optical components can be minia-
turized to a micro-optical scale with the help of miniature beamsplitters, lenses, graded-
index rods, prisms, filters, and gratings, which are compatible with optical fibers for
light transmission.

Diffractive interconnects. Arbitrary optical interconnection maps require the design
of custom optical components that may be quite complex and impractical. However,
computer-generated holograms comprising a large number of phase-grating segments
with different spatial frequencies and orientations have been successfully used to create
high-density optical interconnections. A phase grating is a thin optical element whose
complex amplitude transmittance is a two-dimensional periodic function of unit am-
plitude. The simplest phase grating has complex amplitude transmittance t(x,y) =

24.1 OPTICALINTERCONNECTS 1169
SOT TT TT Ts NUTT TTT Tp
NG REE RIneN WOE
NG RR RIBEEY NUTT TK
УТТИТИ ГЕИ
чину ЕП
SY SOY
Reversal Reversal Crossover Perfect shuffle
SS:
i

оса Fan-out Fan-in Star coupler Projection
Figure 24.1-4 Examples of simple optical interconnects created by conventional refractive
optical components: A prism bends parallel optical rays preferentially and establishes an ordered
interconnection map corresponding to a reversal or crossover. Two appropriately oriented prisms
perform a perfect-shuffle — an operation used in sorting algorithms and in the fast Fourier transform
(FFT). A lens establishes a fan-in, a fan-out, or a reversal. A beamsplitter together with two lenses
creates a directional coupler. A glass rod serves as a star coupler. An astigmatic optical system, such
as a cylindrical lens, implements a projection by connecting points of each row at the input plane to
one point at the output plane.
exp|—j27(v,x + vyy)], where и, and v, are the spatial frequencies in the x and у
directions, respectively; they determine the period and orientation of the grating. It
was shown in Secs. 2.4B and 4.1A that when a coherent optical beam of wavelength
is transmitted through such a grating, it undergoes a phase shift that causes the beam
to tilt by the angles эп "Ли, = Ли, and зш Avy = Avy, when Ли, < 1 and
Avy < 1, as illustrated in Fig. 24.1-5. Varying the spatial frequencies и, and Vy (1.е.,
the periodicity and orientation of the grating) alters the tilt angles.

y № А У
S fr
| =
Г A/vx 1/ vyt р?
Figure 24.1-5 Bending of an optical wave as a result of transmission through а phase grating. The
deflection angles, assumed to be small, depend on the spatial frequency and orientation of the grating.

As described in Sec. 4.1A and illustrated in Fig. 4.1-5, this principle may be used to
implement an arbitrary interconnection map by constructing a phase grating compris-
ing a collection of grating segments with different spatial frequencies. As displayed in
Fig. 24.1-6, optical beams transmitted through the different segments undergo different
tilts, in accordance with the desired interconnection map.

If the grating segment located at position (x,y) has spatial frequencies и, =
V(x,y) and и, = (x,y), the angles of tilt are approximately Ли, and AV,
respectively. The beam then impinges on the output plane at the position (2’, у’)
that satisfies

2х у -у

а. = АЛиь, а. А Ар, (24.1-4)
where d is the distance between the hologram and the output plane, and all angles are
assumed to be small. Given the interconnection map, 1.е., the desired relation between

1170 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
YL’ Cee ar Figure 24.1-6 Holographic interconnec-
ПР А. tion map created by an array of phase gratings
=, of different periodicities and orientations.
=
S (x,y)
а
(т, у’) and (x,y), the requisite spatial frequencies и, and м, at each position are
determined by using (24.1-4).

Holographic interconnection devices are capable of establishing one-to-many or
many-to-one interconnections (1.е., connecting one point to many points, or vice versa).
In Fig. 24.1-6, for example, the center grating element is seen to be a superposition
of two harmonic functions so that its complex amplitude transmittance t(z,y) «
exp[—J27(Vz1xt + и] + exp[—Jj2m(22% + Vy2y)]|; the incident beam is thus split
equally into two components, one tilted at the angles (Лил, Avi) and the other at
the angles (Av;2, AVy2), where all angles are small. Weighted interconnections may
be realized by assigning different weights to the different gratings. Arbitrary inter-
connections may therefore be created by appropriate selection of the grating spatial
frequencies at each point of the hologram.
ee
EXERCISE 24.1-1
Interconnection Capacity. |The space—bandwidth product of a square hologram of size a x a
is the product (Ba)?, where В is the highest spatial frequency (lines/mm) that may be printed on the
hologram. Show that if the hologram is used to direct each of L incoming beams to / directions, the
product ML cannot exceed (Ba)?,

1 e
2
e
: ° ML < (Ba)?.
M e
L e
Hint: Use an analysis similar to that presented in Sec. 20.2C in connection with acousto-optic inter-
connection devices [see (20.2-9)].

What is the maximum number of interconnections per mm? if the highest spatial frequency is
1000 lines/mm and if every point in the input plane is connected to every point in the output plane?
ee

In the limit in which the grating elements have infinitesimal areas, the result is a
continuous (instead of discrete) interconnection map: a geometric coordinate transfor-
mation rule that transforms each point (x, у) in the input plane into a corresponding
point in the output plane (2’, у’). If the desired transformation is defined by the two
continuous functions
the grating frequencies must vary continuously with x and y as in a frequency-
modulated (FM) signal (see Fig. 24.1-7). Assuming that the grating has a transmittance

244 OPTICALINTERCONNECTS 1171
t(x,y) = exp[—jy(z, y)], the associated local (or instantaneous) spatial frequencies
are
Op Op
2пи. = — 2пи, = — 24.1-6
as provided in Sec. 4.1A. Substituting (24.1-6) into (24.1-4) then leads to a pair of
partial differential equations,
Yxo(a,y)-—« _ A Op Читу) -у _ A Ap (24.1-7)
d 2п Ox” d Qr ду’ ,
which may be solved to determine the grating phase function (т, у).
; (ху) р
е Фу) VA (ху)
ООС Figure 24.1-7 Diffraction from a
fe | phase hologram as a continuous inter-
Fri’ i РЯ connection system.
J
—_ —_— d ым—
ПОНИ
EXAMPLE 24.1-1. РГап-т Map. Suppose that all points (x,y) in the input plane are to be
steered to the point (x’,y’) = (0,0) in the output plane, so that a fan-in interconnection map is
created. Substituting w,(x,y) = 4, (т, у) = Ош (24.1-7) and solving the two partial differential
equations, we obtain ф(т, у) = —7(x? + y”)/Ad. Not surprisingly, this is nothing but the phase shift
introduced by a lens of focal length d [see (2.4-9)].
ee
EXERCISE 24.1-2
The Logarithmic Map. Show that the logarithmic coordinate transformation
v= v,(2,y)=Inx,  У=4,(т,у) =Iny (24.1-8)
is realized by a hologram with the phase function
_ м 1 1,2 1 1,2
рен) = <a (a na—-x—s5a°+y пу-у- 7). (24.1-9)
оо сЁётщЩщШЙЩ[ [жи
Once the appropriate phase ф(х, у) is decided, the optical element is fabricated
by using the techniques of computer-generated holography. This approach allows a
complex function exp[—jy(2, у) to be encoded with the help of a binary function that
takes on only two values, 1 and 0, or 1 and —1, for example. This is similar to encoding
an image by making use of a collection of black dots with density or sizes that vary in
proportionality to the local gray value of the image (an example is the halftone process

1172 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

used for printing newspaper images). Software is used to print the binary image on a
mask (a transparency) that plays the role of the hologram. The binary image may also
be printed by etching grooves in a substrate, which modulate the phase of an incident
coherent wave via a technology known as surface-relief holography.

Dynamic (reconfigurable) interconnections may be constructed by using acousto-
optic or magneto-optic devices, although the number of interconnection points is far
smaller than that achievable with holographic gratings. Dynamic holographic intercon-
nections may also be implemented by making use of nonlinear optical processes such
as four-wave mixing in photorefractive materials. In this approach, two waves interfere
to create a grating, from which a third wave is reflected. The angle between the two
waves determines the spatial frequency of the grating, which in turn determines the tilt
of the reflected wave (see Secs. 21.4 and 22.3E).

B. Guided-Wave Interconnects
Optical interconnects are implemented in integrated photonics by patterning optical
waveguides in silicon or LiNbO: substrates (see Sec. 9.4B), much as metal wires
are implemented in integrated electronics. Examples are illustrated in Fig. 24.1-8;
combinations and cascades of these basic interconnects can be used to create more
complex interconnects.

|

2! = 2, и
S SSS SB j
(a) T-coupl ue 1233 > BOOS S83 a
pler | 3 A, Se
2 aa A a
(c) Star coupler <=
(4) 4х4 Mesh coupler

(b) 3-dB coupler
Figure 24.1-8 Integrated-photonic devices implementing some of the interconnects depicted in
Fig. 24.1-1. The mesh coupler is another implementation of the star coupler.

Waveguide couplers are used to distribute optical power in prescribed proportions.
The coupler portrayed in Fig. 24.1-8(6), for example, is described by an interconnection
matrix that is identical to the transmission matrix of (9.4-11),

T= сор —jsin er | ; (24.1-10)
—jsin CL cos CL
where © is the coupling coefficient and Г, is the interaction length. The power arriving
at input port 1 is therefore apportioned between output ports 1 and 2 in accordance
with the factors cos? CL and sin? CL, respectively. For CL = 7/4, the input power is
equally divided between the output ports so that the device becomes a 3-dB coupler.

Fiber-optic interconnects are widely used in optical fiber technology, particularly in
optical fiber communications, and the devices portrayed in Fig. 24.1-9 parallel those
depicted in Fig. 24.1-8 for integrated photonics. Indeed, the coupler shown in Fig. 24. 1-
9(b) is described by the same interconnection matrix as that in Fig. 24.1-8(b), namely
(24.1-10).

24.1 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS 1173
Double-core fiber (c) Fan-in, Fan-out
Splitter or TAP fibers
Double-core fiber .
Beamsplitter
rods
Combiner
(a) T-coupler (b) 3-dB coupler (d) Star coupler

Figure 24.1-9 Fiber-optic couplers that implement some of the interconnects displayed in
Fig. 24.1-1. (а) Double-core fiber used as a T-coupler, splitter, or combiner. (5) 3-dB coupler
comprising two fused fibers; another version makes use of a pair of GRIN-rod lenses separated by
a beamsplitter film. (c) Fan-in or fan-out. (d) Star coupler that relies on fused fibers; another version
makes use of a mixing rod, a slab of glass through which light from one fiber is dispersed to reach all
other fibers.
C. Nonreciprocal Optical Interconnects
Optical implementations of nonreciprocal interconnects are based primarily on nonre-
ciprocal polarization devices. As explained in Sec. 6.6D, an optical isolator may be
implemented by use of a 45° Faraday rotator sandwiched between a pair of polarizers
oriented at 45° with respect to each another. Linearly polarized light is transmitted in
the forward direction but blocked in the reverse direction.

A 45° Faraday rotator followed by a half-wave retarder is also a useful nonre-
ciprocal device, as portrayed in Fig. 6.6-6. The polarization of a forward-traveling
linearly polarized wave whose plane of polarization is oriented at 22.5° with respect
to the fast axis of the retarder is not altered, while the plane of polarization of the
backward-traveling wave is rotated by 90°. This device may be used in conjunction
with polarizing beamsplitters to implement nonreciprocal interconnects, such as 3-port
and 4-port (circulator) devices, as illustrated in Figs. 24.1-10(a) and (6), respectively.

Farada’
He rotator п
a) Ф — spoof Нб)
НЯ ы
РВ5 Retarder
® A Faraday y®
Фо rotator 7 ©
» ot Ss ae №... о. ЕР
с ее №
НН |ЕННЕЕННН
PBS Retarder PBS
Figure 24.1-10 (a) Implementation of the 3-port nonreciprocal interconnect of Fig. 24.1-2(c)
by means of a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS) together with the combination of a Faraday rotator
and a half-wave (м) retarder. Light travels from port (Г) to port @, and from @) to port 0).
(b) Implementation of the 4-port nonreciprocal circulator of Fig. 24.1-3 by means of a pair of
polarizing beamsplitters together with the combination of a Faraday rotator and a half-wave retarder.
Light travels from port to port in accordance with — (2) — (3) —; @ > ©.

1174 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
D. Optical Interconnects in Microelectronics and Computer Systems
The prospect of using optical interconnects in place of conventional electrical intercon-
nects in microelectronics and computer systems has engendered substantial research
and development efforts over the past several decades. Successful implementations
include backplane-to-backplane, board-to-board, chip-to-chip, and intrachip intercon-
nects, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 24.1-11. Integrated photonics has been fueling
the transition from electronic to optical interconnects in venues such as datacenters and
high-performance computers. Some of the strictures that apply to components used in
optical fiber communication systems (Sec. 25.1) are not restrictive in the context of
optical interconnects because of their short reach.
DP
pe ’ В
on
wo
a Board
a Memory,
a
Lg ба Chip Optochip
g
#7, Chip
ig
Board

AA
Figure 24.1-11 Schematic illustration of optical interconnects in microelectronics and computer
systems: backplane-to-backplane, board-to-board, chip-to-chip, and intrachip. Optochips are chip-
scale optical transceivers.
Inter-Board and Inter-Chip Optical Interconnects
With the successful implementation of fiber optics for computer-to-computer com-
munications in local area networks and datacenters (Sec. 25.5), systems employing
optical fibers for backplane-to-backplane and board-to-board communications have
been developed and implemented in high-performance computers. Such short-reach
optical-fiber links can operate at data rates in excess of 100 Gb/s, far greater than those
of electrical links, and the technology is well established (Chapter 25).

Board-to-board interconnects may also be implemented by making use of integrated-

optic waveguides placed on the backplane. In the example illustrated in Fig. 24.1-12(a),
multiple boards are connected in a bus configuration that serves as a star coupler
connecting each board to all others. Board-to-board free-space optical links using
reflecting mirrors or holographic optical elements have also been considered, but they
are cumbersome and inefficient. On-board chip-to-chip optical interconnects using
on-board mirrors and planar waveguides, as depicted in Fig. 24.1-12(b), have also been
developed.
Optochips. A principal component of optical interconnects for microelectronics and
high-performance computing is the optochip, a chip-scale optical transceiver (trans-
mitter/receiver) comprising an array of light sources (e.g., WCSELs) and an array of
photodetectors (PDs), together with their associated transmitter (Tx) and receiver (Rx)
electronic circuitry. A schematic example of an optochip coupled to an on-board planar

24.1 OPTICALINTERCONNECTS 1175
a
(a) Board-to-board my, Ги
a ls | ls Backplane
ee eal
Se " Е : | пни : Board
. Optochip
Ш Optochip Waveguide g J
ее и
Mirror Mirror
Figure 24.1-12 (a) Multiple boards interconnected via planar waveguides in a bus configuration
on the backplane. (b) Chip-to-chip optical interconnect using on-board planar waveguides and
mirrors. Optochips are chip-scale optical transceivers.
waveguide via mirrors is displayed in Fig. 24.1-13(a). Four chips (VCSEL, PD, Tx,
and Rx) are mounted on a Si carrier; light is transmitted between the VCSEL/PD
arrays and the waveguide via holes in the carrier and is focused by means of integrated
lenses. In another example, portrayed in Fig. 24.1-13(5), ап optochip is coupled to
an array of multimode optical fibers (MMFs). In this case the VCSEL and PD arrays
are supported by an organic carrier and are attached to an electronic integrated circuit
(IC) that contains the Tx and Rx circuitry. Light to and from the fibers passes through
holes (vias) in the IC and an array of integrated lenses serve as the focusing element.
VCSELs can generate multimode emission with a numerical aperture compatible with
the ММЕ$. <=
т R nn “”"
i a i Lenses “47 Ч
canter a ШИ ПИ 1 | Cl
- К ^Я эВ ЯВ Вы
| Реввев Г [| ШИ ac
Е
Waveguide a —_= = о Learn |
PCB PCB
(a) (b)
Figure 24.1-13 Schematic illustrations of optochips mounted on printed circuit boards (PCBs).
Light is generated by a VCSEL array driven by a transmitter circuit (Tx), and detected by a
photodetector (PD) array connected to a receiver circuit (Rx). (a) The four chips are mounted on
a Si carrier; light from/to the VCSEL/PD array is directed through holes in the Si carrier, integrated
lenses, and mirrors in the on-board planar waveguide. (b) The VCSEL and PD arrays are attached to
an electronic IC that contains the Tx and Rx circuitry; they are linked to a fiber array via holes (vias)
in the IC and an integrated lens array.

An optochip using an array of 24 VCSELs and 24 PDs, each operating at a data rate
of 15 Gb/s, provides communication at an overall rate of 360 Gb/s. Transceivers that
operate at data rates of 100 Gb/s are readily available for datacenter interconnects and
high-performance computing. These compact modules incorporate lasers, modulators,
splitters, wavelength multiplexers, wavelength demultiplexers, and photodetectors.

1176 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
Intrachip Optical Interconnects
The use of ultra-short-reach optical links to connect points within a chip is a more chal-
lenging enterprise. The use of intrachip optical interconnects is motivated by advances
in high-speed, high-density microelectronics circuitry and the parallel-processing ar-
chitectures found in high-performance computers, which demand high-quality inter-
connectivity to avoid communications bottlenecks. In ultra-large-scale integrated cir-
cuits (ULSD), the interconnects occupy a substantial portion of the available chip area
so considerable effort must be devoted to equalizing interconnect lengths in order to
minimize interconnection time delays (which can exceed gate delays). Intrachip optical
interconnects incorporating carefully designed optochips are commercially available.

An intrachip optical interconnect features three key components: 1) an electronic-
to-optical (E/O) transducer (transmitter) modulated by the electrical signal at a point
within the chip; 2) a point-to-point optical link that carries the signal to another point
on the chip; and 3) an optical-to-electronic (O/E) transducer (receiver) that detects the
signal at the destination point. Ideally, this device should take the form of a photonic
integrated circuit (PIC) in which all three components are monolithically integrated
within the silicon substrate of the chip and are compatible with CMOS (complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor) technology, which is the principal platform for integrated
electronics. In fact, silicon photodiodes (Fig. 19.3-7) can be readily embedded in sil-
icon chips, and silicon-on-insulator (SOI) optical waveguides (Sec. 9.3) can serve
as high-efficiency conduits (although the on-chip real-estate for such guides may be
scarce).
Si-based on-chip sources. The principal difficulty in creating a monolithic intrachip-
interconnect PIC lies with the fabrication of the laser-diode transmitter inasmuch as Si
is an indirect-bandgap material from which light sources cannot be efficiently fash-
ioned (Fig. 17.2-7). Nevertheless, as discussed in Sec. 18.1D in the context of sil-
icon photonics, silicon-based on-chip light sources can be implemented via three
approaches: 1) flip-chip integration of Ш-У laser diodes onto a separately fabricated
silicon platform with the help of solder bumps; 2) heterogeneous integration of Ш-У
lasers into prepatterned silicon circuits (hybrid approach); and 3) direct heteroepitaxial
growth оЕШ-У lasers on Si substrates using intermediate buffer layers to minimize dis-
locations in the light-emitting region. Each of these approaches has its own limitations
and merits. Hybrid integration is widely used (Fig. 24.1-14) but direct heteroepitaxy
may be the most attractive alternative going forward.

. InP lich SOI Waveguide

AlGaAs, source Light nP light source EE

he р>. —s F

(a) (d)

Figure 24.1-14 Light sources integrated with Si CMOS chips via heterogeneous integration
(hybrid approach). The Ш-У source chips are fabricated separately and then integrated with the Si
structure. (a) An AlGaAs optical source is bonded to a silicon chip in a surface normal architecture.
(b) An InP light source is bonded to a silicon chip and the emitted light is coupled into an on-chip
silicon-on-insulator (SOD) ridge waveguide.
Alternative on-chip sources. Group-IV materials other than Si can be used to
fabricate light sources (Sec. 17.1B and Fig. 17.1-6); GeSn alloys, for example, are

24.1 OPTICALINTERCONNECTS 1177

compatible with silicon and CMOS technology. Various types of compact, low-
threshold lasers are also good candidates for use in optical interconnects; these include
VCSELs (Sec. 18.5A), microdisk and microring lasers (Sec. 18.5B), photonic-crystal
lasers (Sec. 18.5C), and nanocavity lasers (Sec. 18.6). Also, directly modulated optical
sources can be replaced with externally illuminated electro-optic (Sec. 21.1B) or
electroabsorption (Sec. 21.5) modulators that derive their modulation signals directly
from the local electrical signals within the chip. This approach, although inefficient
and cumbersome, has the merit that it decouples the modulation and light-generation
mechanisms, thereby allowing them to be independently optimized.
On-chip holographic interconnects. Free-space optical links using external devices
such as holograms have also been considered for intrachip interconnects, as illustrated
in Fig. 24.1-15(a). A configuration that does not require the use of on-chip transmitters
is a one-way interconnect between one, or several, external point(s) and points on the
chip, as illustrated in Fig. 24.1-15(6). A useful application for such a configuration is
optical clock distribution, where a signal from an external clock modulates an external
light source that broadcasts the signal to multiple photodetectors on the chip using a
reflection hologram. This ensures accurate synchronization of high-speed synchronous
circuits and mitigates the problem of clock skew that results from differential time
delays. The hologram may, of course, be eliminated and the light “broadcast” directly
to all points on the chip. While this creates a robust system that is insensitive to
misalignment, the power efficiency is low since a large portion of the optical power
is lost.

Cnt = "A я” : < ==
„оо“
7 есмь

@ ()
Figure 24.1-15 (a) Interconnects between on-chip sources and detectors via an external reflection
hologram used as an interconnect element. (b) One-way interconnects directing clock pulses from an
external light source to photodetectors on a silicon chip.
Rationale for Chip Optical Interconnects
Optical interconnects offer a number of advantages for inter- and intrachip intercon-
nects that stem principally from the short wavelength of light and its corresponding
high frequency (e.g., 20-50 THz), which is substantially greater than the bandwidth
of the transmitted data. Electronic interconnects, in contrast, use baseband signals at
far lower frequencies (e.g., in the GHz range). The principal advantages of optical
interconnects, in terms of their larger bandwidths, shorter delays, higher densities, and
lower power consumption, are set forth below.
= Bandwidth. The bandwidth of an electronic strip line of length @ and cross-
sectional area A placed above a ground plane is proportional to the ratio A/0?.
This can be understood for a line limited by ВС effects, since the resistance
В х ¢/A while the capacitance С' сх 6, so that the time constant ВС « 62/А.
A similar argument applies to lines limited by LC’ effects. The bandwidth is
thus determined by the aspect ratio 6 / VA and cannot be altered by miniaturizing
the device or by increasing its size. Optical interconnects do not suffer from

1178 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
this aspect ratio limitation since the bandwidth is governed by other physical
effects and is generally larger. Moreover, for optical interconnects, the maximum
bandwidth of the data carried by each connection is not affected by the density of
proximate interconnects. Said differently, the optical crosstalk among neighboring
lines is not influenced by an increase in the data rate. This stems from the small
ratio of the bandwidth to the carrier frequency of the modulated light. This is
not the case for electronic interconnects, in which the density must be reduced
sharply at high modulation frequencies to eliminate capacitive and inductive
coupling among proximate interconnects. Optical interconnects therefore offer
greater density—bandwidth products than do electronic interconnects.
= Delay. Photons travel at a speed c, = 0.3 mm/ps in free space and at со/п =
0.086 mm/ps in silicon (n = 3.5). The corresponding propagation time delays are
therefore = 3.3 ps/mm and = 11.7 ps/mm, respectively. Electrical-signal delays
on strip lines fabricated from ceramics and polyimides are approximately 10.2
and 6.8 ps/mm, respectively. Propagation delay is therefore not an issue per se.
However, the velocity of light is independent of the number of interconnections
branching from an optical interconnect, whereas in electronic transmission lines
the velocity is inversely proportional to the capacitance per unit length and there-
fore depends on the total capacitive “load”; hence the propagation delay time
increases as fan-outs increase. Optics thus offers greater flexibility with respect
to fan-out and fan-in interconnections, which are limited only by the available
optical power.
= Density. The most dense set of interference-free interconnects makes use of un-
guided beams, each with a small width and a small divergence angle, limited
only by diffraction (the product of the width and the angle of a narrow beam
is of the order of a wavelength, which is small at optical frequencies). Moreover,
since such beams can intersect (pass through one another) without mutual interfer-
ence (assuming that the medium is linear), they can be used in three-dimensional
configurations to create interconnects with densities unmatchable by electrical
wires. Light may also be guided in planar or quasi-planar low-loss dielectric
waveguides, with widths as small as a wavelength, that can be packed densely
with minimal crosstalk. Electrical interconnects, on the other hand, use metallic
conductors, such as strip lines, that serve as transmission lines or waveguides
for the electromagnetic waves associated with the oscillating electric charges.
Metallic conductors introduce losses and cannot be packed as tightly since they
become susceptible to electromagnetic interference when in close proximity.
= Power. To avoid reflections, electrical interconnects must be terminated with a
matched impedance, which generally requires an increase in the expenditure of
power. For optical interconnects, on the other hand, reflections can be significantly
reduced by making use of antireflection coatings. Optical power requirements are
typically limited by photodetector sensitivities, the efficiencies of electrical-to-
optical and optical-to-electrical conversion processes, and the power transmission
efficiencies of the interconnect elements.
24.2 PASSIVE OPTICAL ROUTERS
A passive optical router redirects the data carried by a set of incoming optical beams
to one or more of a set of outgoing optical beams, on the basis of the location of
the beam and a physical attribute X associated with the data (e.g., wavelength, polari-
zation, intensity, phase, or arrival time). A single incoming or outgoing beam may carry
several components marked by different values of X. The system avoids contention,
Le., routing different data marked by the same attribute value to the same outgoing

24.2 PASSIVE OPTICAL ROUTERS 1179
beam. Three common routers are the demultiplexer, the multiplexer, and the add—drop
multiplexer, as described below and illustrated in Fig. 24.2-1.

= A demultiplexer (DMUX ог DEMUX) is а 1 x N router that sorts the com-
ponents with attribute values X1, X2,..., Хм ша single input beam and directs
them to separate output ports, as shown in Fig. 24.2-1(a). The DMUX may be
implemented by use of a broadcast-and-select operation: a 1 x N fan-out inter-
connect broadcasts copies of the incoming beam to all output ports and is followed
by a bank of filters that select components with the desired attribute values and
reject all others.
= The multiplexer (MUX) is the inverse of the DMUX. As illustrated in Fig. 24.2-
1(6), input beams with distinct values of the optical attributes X,, X2,..., Xn
are combined into a single beam that can be subsequently separated by use of a
demultiplexer. Multiplexing and demultiplexing based on wavelength, frequency,
and time are used extensively in optical communication systems.
= The add-drop multiplexer (ADM), portrayed in Fig. 24.2-1(c), is another im-
portant routing device used in communication networks. Here, a demultiplexer
sorts components with different attribute values, separates the component of a
selected attribute value, say Хо, drops its data content and instead adds new data,
and then subsequently combines all components into a single beam by use of a
multiplexer. The optical ADM (OADM) is commonly used in optical networks.
Хх! Х! Хм
% х, Е
ОНИ
ХХ, ... ХМ x3 Хз X1,X>, ... Xy WJ ; Nie
: : \ Х Х 7 °
Ww
Хм Хм Add №2 Г | x2 Drop
| ya И
(a) DMUX (b) MUX (c) ADM
Figure 24.2-1 Attribute-based routers. (а) Demultiplexer (DMUX). (5) Multiplexer (MUX).
(с) Add—drop multiplexer (ADM).
A. Wavelength-Based Routers
Wavelength-based routers are commonly used in wavelength-division multiplex-
ing (WDM) optical fiber communication systems and networks. As described in
Sec. 25.3C, these systems incorporate channels with multiple wavelengths in the same
optical fiber. They employ routers that combine the channels at the fiber input and
separate them at the fiber output using wavelength-based routers called wavelength-
division multiplexers and wavelength-division demultiplexers, respectively.
Implementations of Wavelength-Division Multiplexers/Demultiplexers
A number of techniques, some of which are illustrated in Fig. 24.2-2, can be used for
wavelength-division demultiplexing.
= An angularly dispersive optical device will separate the components of different
wavelengths within a single optical beam into separate optical beams. The sim-
plest devices that exhibit angular dispersion are the prism [Fig. 24.2-2(a)] and the
diffraction grating [Fig. 24.2-2(b)]. The angular dispersion of a prism is limited
by the rate of change of the refractive index with respect to the wavelength,
dn/dX, which is usually not sufficiently large to adequately separate compo-
nents of slightly different wavelengths. Prisms made of photonic-crystal materials

1180 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
M+A2+A3 2 AL +A2+A3 Grating
AL +A2 + АЗ — . — Е — —-
4 м Е
i= ^—
AO = =
(a) Prism (b) Diffraction gratings
AL + A2 + АЗ GRIN
=e M | №2 | 3 {
M AL +A2+A3 _, А+ 3
— ——= ——-
2 ——__ FBG ООО
А2 А1 + Л2 + A3
Be— =:
TFF
(c) Thin-film filters (d) Fiber Bragg grating (FBG) (e) Microring resonators
Figure 24.2-2 Wavelength-division demultiplexers. (a) Prism. (6) Diffraction grating with a lens
or graded-index (GRIN) rod. (c) Dielectric thin-film interference filters (TFFs). (d) Fiber Bragg
gratings (FBGs). (e) Microring resonator filters.
(Chapter 7), called superprisms, can exhibit dispersive power that is two to
three orders of magnitude greater than that of conventional materials. The angular
dispersion of diffraction gratings (Sec. 2.4B) is stronger than that of ordinary
prisms; they are capable of resolving wavelength differences corresponding to a
few GHz.
= Wavelength separation may also be implemented by using a bank of filters tuned
to the different wavelengths. The incoming light is broadcast to the different
filters; each filter transmits a single wavelength channel and blocks all others.
Alternatively, the beam may be directed through a sequence of filters with narrow
spectral passbands, such as dielectric thin-film interference filters (TFFs), each
of which transmits one wavelength and reflects all others to the next filter, as
illustrated in Fig. 24.2-2(c). A GRIN rod may be used to guide the rays between
the filters.
= In a similar implementation, the wavelength dependence of the reflectance of a
fiber Bragg grating (FBG) (Sec. 7.1C) is exploited to separate wavelength com-
ponents; the component at the Bragg wavelength 43 = 2A, where A is the
grating period, is reflected and all other components are transmitted. Multiple
Bragg gratings are used to separate multiple wavelengths [Fig. 24.2-2(d)].
= In yet another similar implementation, a sequence of microring-resonator filters,
each tuned to one wavelength, is used [Fig. 24.2-2(e)].
= Other implementations make use interferometers such as the Mach-Zehnder
interferometer and the arrayed waveguides router, as will be described sub-
sequently.
Optical Add-—Drop Multiplexer (OADM)
An optical add—drop multiplexer (OADM) drops data from, and simultaneously adds
data to, selected wavelength channels of a multi-channel optical beam. The individual
wavelength channels may be accessed by means of a demultiplexer followed by a
multiplexer, as portrayed in Fig. 24.2-1(c). A selected wavelength channel, along with
its associated data, is separated from the other channels by means of a wavelength-
sensitive optical element and extracted (dropped) by detecting (annihilating) it. New
data are added via a modulated optical source. We consider two examples of OADMs

24.2 PASSIVE OPTICAL ROUTERS 1181
based on this arrangement. The first, pictured in Figs. 24.2-3, makes use of a fiber
Bragg grating (FBG) as the wavelength-selective element while the second, illustrated
in Fig. 24.2-4, uses multiple microring resonators for this purpose.

Circulator Circulator
M, №2, АЗ 1, 2, АЗ №, 23 №1, 2, АЗ
— > —> —
х FBG <> Al
Drop Al Add Al
Figure 24.2-3 An optical add-drop multiplexer (OADM). This version makes use of a fiber Bragg
grating (FBG) to reflect the wavelength component А1, which is then directed by a circulator to a
photodetector for annihilation. The remaining components, Az and Аз, pass through the FBG to the
output. Another circulator serves to add light, modulated by new data, at A;. The FBG retroreflects
light at Ay.
я 1 № а Figure 24.2-4 Another configuration for ап
Input Output OADM. This version makes use of multiple micro-
“1 м _ ring resonators to extract the wavelength compo-
nent A, from the multichannel input beam and to
direct it to a photodetector for annihilation. The
® remaining components, Ay and Аз, pass through to
the output. Light at A,, modulated by new data,
@ is selected by the resonators and transferred to the
output beam. Multiple microring resonators offer
greater wavelength selectivity (narrower spectral
Add} Al @ = Drop width and greater rejection ratio) than single
bo microring resonators.
The Mach-Zehnder Interferometer as a Demultiplexer
Since interferometers are sensitive to wavelength, they are suitable for wavelength-
division routing. The integrated-photonic Mach—Zehnder interferometer (М1) por-
trayed in Fig. 24.2-5, for example, may be used as a two-wavelength demultiplexer.
To direct the components of wavelengths Л! and Az in the input beam to different
output ports, the pathlength difference Ad is selected such that the phase difference
ф = 2rAd/ 1$ an even multiple of т at Л! and an odd multiple of т at Ag; 1.е.,
Да = 41: А! /2 and Ad = qoA2/2, where 41 is an even integer and 42 is an odd integer.
Pi
Al
do + Ad
№, № F ы № —Py А
0 да да да Л

4 2
Figure 24.2-5 Wavelength-division routing (demultiplexing) of two wavelengths by use of ап
integrated-photonic Mach—Zehnder interferometer.

1182 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

The resolution of the routing device, i.e., the closest wavelengths that can be sepa-
rated, is determined by writing |1/,;—1/A2| = |91—92|/2Аа, and taking |41—42| = 1,
so that |1/A; — 1/A2| = 1/2Ad. The corresponding frequency difference Av =
|v. — V| is therefore

Av=— (24.2-1)
 2а’
For example, if Ad = 1 mm and n = 1.5, then Av = 100 GHz. Smaller separations
Ди require proportionally longer pathlength differences Ad.
The spectral sensitivity of the МИЛ router may be determined by writing its inter-
connection matrix as
17 —72. (4 + Ad)/X 0 17
т 1 4] fexpl-s2m(do + 4) /Х ГЛ 0422)
71 0 exp(—j2mdo/A)} |7 1
where do + Ad and do represent the pathlengths of the interferometer branches. The
first and third entries in this matrix product are the interconnection matrices for a 3-dB
coupler set forth in (24.1-2). For an input field of unit power at input port 2, the powers
received at output ports | and 2 are Py = | Т21 |? and Р. = | To)", respectively, so that
P, =cos*(tAd/\) and Р> = зш?(пАа/Л). (24.2-3)
These powers are plotted in Fig. 24.2-5 as functions of А. It is clear from this de-
pendence that the smaller the ratio \/Ad, the more rapidly these functions alternate
between 0 and 1 and thus the greater the possibility for demultiplexing closely spaced
wavelengths.

Multiple MZIs may be cascaded to separate more than two wavelengths. For exam-
ple, four wavelengths may be separated in a two-step process, as illustrated in Fig. 24.2-
6. The first MZI separates the odd-numbered from the even-numbered wavelengths,
and subsequent MZIs implement finer wavelength separations.

Al
aK XT 3 Figure 24.2-6 Wavelength-division rout-
- = ` ing (demultiplexing) of four wavelengths by
№, 43,4 к № use of cascaded integrated-photonic Mach—

aK Zehnder interferometers.

A4

Arrayed Waveguides (AWG) Routers
Other interferometric configurations may be used to provide greater wavelength se-
lectivity. Multipath interferometers, for example, are highly selective to wavelength
since they exhibit sharp resonances. Such interferometers may be custom designed
using planar waveguides and may be configured to provide routing for a large number
of wavelengths in devices that contain many input and output ports. The arrayed
waveguides (AWG) router operates on the principle that each connection between
an input port and output port is configured as an independent multipath interferometer
that transmits only specific wavelengths. Since this device is similar to a diffraction-
grating spectrometer, the AWG router is also known as a waveguide grating router

(WGR).

24.2 PASSIVE OPTICAL ROUTERS 1183
Multipath interferometer. Before embarking on a discussion of the operation of the
AWG, we first review the properties of the multipath interferometer. An L-path inter-
ferometer is a connection comprising L optical paths whose lengths increase progres-
sively and linearly so that adjacent paths have exactly the same pathlength difference
Да, as portrayed in Fig. 24.2-7. The wave received at the output port is then the sum
of Г, waves of equal amplitudes and equal phase difference, as considered in Sec. 2.5B.
Since the phase difference between adjacent paths is р = 27Ad/. at wavelength A,
the power transmittance provided in (2.5-12) becomes
in?(Ly/2 in?(LrAd/X
T= sin (Le/2) = sin (Lm Ad/A) (24.2-4)
sin’ (Ф/2) зш“(лАа/^)
which is a periodic function of ф with sharp peaks that occur when ф equals integer
multiples of 27, as shown in Fig. 2.5-7. The dependence of T on Л is not periodic, but
rather comprises sharp peaks at Л = Ad and integer fractions thereof, as illustrated in
Fig. 24.2-7. The larger the number of paths Г, the sharper the peaks.
do +LAd о
=
=——__ oS =
с Ad/3 Ad/2 Ad)
Figure 24.2-7 A multipath interferometer and the wavelength dependence of its transmittance.
The AWG as a wavelength-division demultiplexer. An arrayed waveguides (AWG)
router may be used as a 1 x N wavelength-based router that directs each of № wave-
length components, A;, А2,..., Ам, at the input port to one of the № output ports, as
shown in Fig. 24.2-8. There are N multipath interferometers, one for each of the output
ports. Each interferometer has a unique pathlength difference Ad selected such that
only a specific wavelength is transmitted. This is achieved if the connections leading to
the mth output port are designed to have a pathlength difference Аа», that is an integer
multiple of A,,, but not an integer multiple of the other wavelengths.
57 = Star N ;
coupler coupler hw Wi Dw
Figure 24.2-8 Wavelength-division demultiplexing using an arrayed waveguides (AWG) router.
The design is simpler if the wavelengths 1, A2,..., Ам are distributed uniformly
as a decreasing sequence, A, = Ло — mAA, where АЛ is the wavelength channel

1184 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
separation and Ло = A, — A. A necessary condition for operation of the demultiplexer
is

Adm = Am = 0 - MAX, m=1,2,...,N, (24.2-5)
indicating that the pathlength difference for the connections to the mth output port
decreases linearly with т. The other condition is that Ад» is not equal to an integer
multiple of Az for all 2 = т. This condition is automatically satisfied if the shortest
wavelength Ам is greater than one half of the longest wavelength Лу, as depicted in
Fig. 24.2-8.

In the implementation displayed in Fig. 24.2-8, each pathlength between the input
port and an output port is the sum of the waveguide length and the distances traveled in
the star couplers. The waveguide lengths may be selected to increase progressively by a
fixed length Ad,,. For a star coupler with circular boundaries, the pathlength difference
may be approximated by a linearly decreasing function of m, so that

Adm = Ady + (Ad, —mAd,), (24.2-6)
where Ad, and Ad) are constants that depend on the geometry of the couplers. The
condition provided in (24.2-5) can therefore be satisfied if Ad, + Аа. = Ao and
Ad, = Ax. The resolution of the wavelength demultiplexer, 1.е., the minimum wave-
length separation AX, is therefore limited by the minimum value of the geometrical
factor Ad>.

The AWG as an N X N wavelength router. The AWG may also be used as a more
general N x № wavelength router. The connections between the ИБ input port and the
mth output port form а multipath interferometer with pathlength difference Ad;,, =
Aoo— (6+ т) AA, which decreases linearly with both and m (Ago and АЛ are constants
that depend on the geometry of the AWG). Light is transmitted between these ports if
the wavelength Лит equals Арт, i.e., if
Nem = Лоо — ((+т)АЛ, &,m=1,2,...,N. (24.2-7)
AWG Equation
Equation (24.2-7) is a generalization of (24.2-5). Although the AWG does not imple-
ment an arbitrary wavelength routing, it can offer solutions to certain routing problems
such as simultaneous wavelength multiplexing operations.
B. Polarization- , Phase- , and Intensity-Based Routers
Polarization-Based Routing
A simple example of passive optical routing is based on polarization. In polarization-
division demultiplexing the parallel and orthogonal polarization components of an opti-
cal beam are separated by making use of a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS), as illustrated
in Fig. 24.2-9. Polarization-based multiplexing is achieved by using the PBS as a beam
combiner, with light traveling from right-to-left instead of from left-to-right.
Ру.Р2 P Figure 24.2-9 Polarization-division routing using
a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS). For beams traveling
from left-to-right, the prism is a demultiplexer. For
Pa beams traveling from right-to-left, it is a multiplexer.

24.2 PASSIVE OPTICAL ROUTERS 1185
Phase-Based Routing
Another simple example of passive optical routing is based on phase. Here a sequence
of optical pulses with phases 0 огл are to be sorted based on phase and routed to two
output ports. This may be accomplished by making use of a simple Mach—Zehnder
interferometer, as shown in Fig. 24.2-10.
| Output 1
t
LF
d=O7T07TTO Input
ie Figure 24.2-10 Phase-based routing using
! a Mach-Zehnder interferometer.
TANNA | Reference
t
Intensity-Based Routing
A light beam whose intensity takes on different values at different times may be routed
into separate beams based on the value of the intensity. For example, a light beam
carrying a sequence of pulses with two intensities, as depicted in Fig. 24.2-11, may
be separated into two beams, one containing the high-intensity pulses and the other
containing the low-intensity pulses. This demultiplexing operation requires the use of a
nonlinear optical element. It is often implemented by converting the intensity variation
into phase change via the optical Kerr effect (Sec. 22.3A), as described next.
Nonlinear Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI). The nonlinear МИЛ is a conven-
tional MZI in which a nonlinear optical element, such as a Kerr cell, is placed in
one of the interferometer branches. The cell introduces a phase shift proportional to
the light intensity. The system is adjusted such that the phase difference between the
interferometer branches is an odd multiple of 7 for one intensity, and an even multiple
оЁл for the other. This diverts the stream of pulses into two output ports, one containing
the high-intensity pulses and the other containing the low-intensity pulses, as illustrated
in Fig. 24.2-11(a). The interferometer may also be implemented using optical fibers,
as depicted in Fig. 24.2-11(6).
п, п, 12 qi
Input
= п 1
t — t —=
_- t Input Output 1
Output ni ' В П on
(a) (b) t
Figure 24.2-11 An intensity-based 1 x 2 router using a Mach-Zehnder interferometer in which
a nonlinear Kerr medium has been placed in one of the interferometer branches. (a) Bulk-optics
version. (b) Fiber-optics version.
Nonlinear asymmetric Sagnac interferometer. An intensity-based 1 x 2 router
using a nonlinear fiber Sagnac interferometer is illustrated in Fig. 24.2-12. In this
configuration, light enters from fiber 1 and is split into a clockwise wave and а coun-
terclockwise wave. If the optical pathlengths of these waves are identical, constructive
interference occurs and the light propagates back into fiber 1 and is directed to output
port 1, so that the device acts as a mirror. This occurs if the fiber is linear, or if the fiber
is nonlinear and the intensities of the two waves are equal. However, if the coupler
feeding the interferometer loop is not symmetric, then the intensities in the two paths
are unequal, in which case the phase shifts introduced via the optical Kerr effect are

1186 — CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

generally different. When the phase difference is п, destructive interference ensues and
light is diverted into fiber 2 and output port 2. Since the phase difference is proportional
to the intensity of the incident wave, the system acts as a 1 x 2 self-controlled intensity-
division router (a demultiplexer).

Asymmetry between the clockwise and counterclockwise waves in the Sagnac inter-
ferometer may also be introduced by placing an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA)
at an asymmetric location within the loop. This serves to amplify one of the interfering
waves during the first half of its trip around the loop, so that it travels more than half a
round trip at a high intensity. The other wave is amplified during the second half of its
trip around the loop so it travels a shorter distance at high intensity and thus encounters
a smaller nonlinear phase shift. This system is known as a nonlinear optical loop
mirror (NOLM).

nn fi Output 1
г — Asymmetric Nonlinear element
п. = coupler, Figure 24.2-12 Intensity-based 1 x 2
; Input Fiber | = router using a nonlinear Sagnac interfer-
| | | Output 2 > ) ometer that serves as a nonlinear optical
— ; Е loop mirror (МОЁМ).
т Fiber 2 Fiber loop
Nonlinear directional coupler (NLDC). A waveguide or fiber-optic directional
coupler made of a Kerr material can also serve as an intensity-based router, as
illustrated in Fig. 24.2-13. If the intensity of the input pulse is low, the medium
is approximately linear and the light is periodically coupled from one guide to the
other as it travels (Fig. 9.4-6). If the length of the coupler is equal to the transfer
distance Го and there is no phase mismatch, the light is completely transferred from
the input waveguide to the other waveguide. However, for pulses of large intensity the
propagation constants are altered by the Kerr effect, creating an intensity-dependent
phase mismatch that varies with distance. Propagation then obeys the nonlinear
coupled differential equations
da, . . . 2
=: = —jCexp(jABz)a2(z) — ааа (24.2-8)
day . . : 2
Fe ®ехр(-7АВ2)аа(2) — Ра аз, (24.2-9)
which are generalizations of the linear coupled equations (9.4-4) for the conventional
directional coupler. Here, © = 1 /2Lp is the coupling coefficient and -y is proportional
to the optical Kerr coefficient ng [Sec. 22.3A and (23.5-16)]. The system is designed
so that the high-intensity pulses exit the coupler from the same waveguide and are
separated from the low-intensity pulses, as displayed in Fig. 24.2-13.
(a) '
In t
I п h
Double-core fiber
Figure 24.2-13 Intensity-based 1 x 2 router using a directional coupler fabricated from a nonlinear
optical material. Implementation in: (a) integrated-photonic technology; (6) fiber-optic technology.

24.3 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1187
Soliton directional coupler. Since the intensity of an optical pulse varies during
its time course, so too does the nonlinear refractive index nz and the corresponding
propagation constant in the nonlinear medium. Different fractions of the pulse power
are therefore transferred between the two channels, which can lead to pulse reshaping
and possibly to pulse breakup. However, this will not occur in a fiber-optic NLDC
[Fig. 24.2-13(b)] if the pulse is an optical soliton (Sec. 23.5B). Because the nonlinear
phase shift of an optical soliton is constant over the pulse’s envelope, the soliton
pulse remains intact as it is routed between the coupled fibers. A further advantage
of operating the NLDC in the soliton mode is that the transition between the output
ports is a far sharper function of the input pulse power.

24.3 PHOTONIC SWITCHES
A. Space-Switch Architectures
A switch is a device that both establishes and releases connections among transmission
paths in a communication or signal-processing system. A control unit processes the
commands for connections and sends a control signal to operate the switch in the
desired manner. Whereas interconnects always operate on the incoming signals in the
same manner, switches are controllable, active, or reconfigurable interconnects that can
be modified by an external command. Space switches establish transmission paths that
route optical beams between specific physical locations, namely the input and output
ports of the switch. Examples of such switches are displayed in Fig. 24.3-1.
2 |1 Им
1 О о О
2. Jf
1
т
1 1 1 3 | ii!
P| =. ; sel. ae 4
Control Control Control Control 4 Control
(a) (Б) (с) (d) (e)

Figure 24.3-1 Examples of space switches. (a) A 1 x 1 switch connects or disconnects two lines.
It is an ON—OFF switch. (b) A 1 x 2 switch connects one line to either of two lines. (c) A 2 x 2 crossbar
switch connects two lines to two lines. It has two configurations: the bar state and the cross state, and
may be regarded as a controllable directional coupler. (4) A 1 x N switch connects one line to one
of № lines. (е) An N x М crossbar switch connects N lines to № lines. Any input line can always be
connected to a free (unconnected) output line without blocking (i.e., without conflict).

A 1 x 1 switch can be used as an elementary unit from which switches of larger
sizes can be built. An N x N crosspoint-matrix (crossbar) switch, for example, may
be constructed by using an array of N? 1 x 1 switches, organized at the points of an
N x М matrix, to connect or disconnect each of the № input lines to а free output line
[Fig. 24.3-1(e)]. In this portrayal, the mth input reaches all elementary switches in the
mth row, while the ИВ output is connected to the outputs of all elementary switches in
the ИБ column. A connection is effected between the mth input and the ИВ output by
activating the (т, 1) 1 x 1 switch. Examples that make use of 1 x 1 switches are shown
in Fig. 24.3-2.

1188 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
1
1 2
2 3
(a) 3 (Б)
1
le. 2
3
Figure 24.3-2 (a) А 1х 3 switch made from three 1 x 1 switches. (5) A 3 x 3 switch made from
nine 1 x 1 switches in a broadcast-and-select configuration.
An N x М switch can also be constructed by using 2 x 2 switches as building blocks.
Examples that make use of 2 x 2 switches are displayed in Fig. 24.3-3.
2 2
Sooo eS Se OG [| OE:
aS ee eee — р ie
о реа О i И,
Г ee РГ Е Е Е
и О п |
“ у me ee ‘
8 8
[eT НИ
(b)
Figure 24.3-3 (a) A 4 x 4 switch made from five 2 x 2 switches. Input line 1 is connected to
output line 3, for example, if switches A and C are in the cross state and switch F is in the bar state.
(b) An 8 x 8 switch comprising 28 interconnected 2 x 2 switches.
Photonic Switch Characteristics
A photonic switch is characterized by the following parameters:
= Size: number of input and output lines.
= Direction(s): whether data can be transferred in one or two directions.
и Switching time: time required for the switch to be reconfigured.
= Propagation delay time: time required by the signal to cross the switch.
= Throughput: maximum data rate that can flow through the switch.
= Switching energy: energy required to activate and deactivate the switch.
= Power dissipation: energy dissipated per second in the process of switching.
= Insertion loss: decrease in signal power introduced by forging the connection.
= Extinction ratio: contrast between the ON and OFF states.
= Crosstalk: undesired power leakage to other lines.
= Blocking probability: probability that a connection cannot be established because
of a conflict with another connection.
= Physical dimensions: the physical size is an important consideration when large
arrays of switches are built.
B. Implementations of Photonic Space Switches
Optoelectronic Switches
Electronic switches have evolved a great deal since the early years of telephony, gen-
erally tracking the steady advances in microelectronics. Nanoscale CMOS electronic

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1189
gates can operate at switching times as small as 0.1 ns and with switching energies
smaller than 1 fJ. Advanced MOSFET gates can be switched at subpicosecond time
scales. Electronic chips for crossbar switching with large numbers of ports (e.g., 128 x
128) are readily available. It is therefore natural to consider these devices for pho-
tonic switching. Unfortunately, optoelectronic switches are cumbersome for photonic
switching inasmuch as they require optical-to-electrical conversion at the input of the
switch and electrical-to-optical conversion at its output, as illustrated schematically
in Fig. 24.3-4. Moreover, the optical/electrical/optical conversions required for the
operation of optoelectronic switches introduce substantial time delays and power loss.
It is therefore desirable to make use of “transparent” photonic switches that operate
directly on the optical signals.

. Electronic crossbar Optoelectronic
Optoelectronic switch transmitter chip
receiver chip
ee =
Incoming Outgoing
Fibers Fibers
Electronic control
Figure 24.3-4 An optoelectronic crossbar switch. Incoming optical signals carried by optical
fibers are detected by an array of photodetectors on an optoelectronic chip, switched using an
electronic crossbar switch, and regenerated using an array of light sources (e.g., VWCSELs) that feed
outgoing optical fibers. The process is cumbersome and inefficient.
Elementary Photonic-Switch Configurations
The most elementary of photonic switches are the optical scanner and the modulator.
A scanner that deflects an optical beam into one of N possible directions is a 1 x N
switch [Fig. 24.3-5(а)]. An optical modulator operated in ON-OFF mode also serves
as a 1 x 1 switch. Modulation may be direct, relying on some physical effect that
transmits or blocks the light, or interferometric, using for example an optical phase
modulator placed in one arm of a Mach—Zehnder interferometer, which converts phase
modulation into intensity modulation [Fig. 24.3-5(b)]. Another elementary photonic
switch is a directional coupler operated as a 2 x 2 switch. This may be implemented by
making use of a Mach—Zehnder interferometer in which a phase modulator is placed
in one or both branches [Fig. 24.3-5(c)]. The two interferometer branches may also
represent two orthogonal polarization components, in which case the phase modulator
is a wave retarder that introduces a relative phase shift between the two polarizations.
{ Output 1
UN — —
2 \ Output Output 2
—_ Input Input 1
Control “SS 2 Г 1
Control Input 2 Control
(a) (Б) (с)

Figure 24.3-5 (a) Ап optical scanner as а 1 x № switch. (5) An interferometer with a phase
modulator as a 1 x 1 switch. (с) An interferometer with a phase modulator as a 2 x 2 switch.

Elementary photonic switches may be combined or cascaded in free space or in
planar-waveguide technology to create switches of higher dimension. As illustrated in

1190 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
Fig. 24.3-6, for example, a planar array of 16 optical modulators, each serving as a
1 x 1 switch, may be configured in an optical system that operates as a 4 x 4 crossbar
switch in the broadcast-and-select configuration.
1
RY 2 3 Figure 24.3-6 A 4 x 4 crossbar switch.
as 4 Each of the 16 elements is a 1 x 1 switch
VATS: RY that transmits or blocks light depending on
y ч Я | | a control signal. Light from the mth point
SN Ц i) of the input, m = 1,2,3,4, is broadcast to
1 SIS м all switches in the mth row. Light from all
1% uss > 4x4 switches in the /th column is directed to the
3%] = modulators ИБ output point, [ = 1,2,3,4. The system
4 Т control is an implementation of the 4 x 4 switch
y depicted in Fig. 24.3-1(e).

The modulation and deflection of light can be achieved by the use of mechani-
cal; electromechanical; electrical; acoustical; magnetic; and thermal control. Switches
that operate under these rubrics are, respectively, mechano-optic (or optomechanical);
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS); electro-optic, semiconductor, and liquid-
crystal; acousto-optic, magneto-optic, and thermo-optic. The remainder of this section
is devoted to providing brief outlines of these technologies. All-optical, or opto-optic,
switches are described in Sec. 24.3C. The switching times of these various devices are
compared in the following diagram:

— ОО О ОР ОР ООО ПОР
16 1 ps 1 ns 1 pus 1 ms

Mechano-Optic Switches

A mechano-optic (or optomechanical) 1 х № switch (a scanner) may be implemented
by using a moving (rotating or alternating) mirror, prism, or holographic grating that
deflects a light beam to a set of directions (Fig. 24.3-7). As illustrated in Fig. 24.3-7(c),
an optical fiber can be connected to any of a number of other optical fibers by me-
chanically moving the input fiber to align with the selected output fiber. Piezoelectric
elements may be used for faster mechanical action.

Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) are miniaturized mechanical arrange-
ments powered by electrostatic actuators and fabricated in large arrays using processes
similar to those used in microelectronics. Switching times range from 10 jus to 10 ms.
A crossbar switch, for example, may be implemented by using a set of MEMS popup
mirrors, as shown in Fig. 24.3-8(а), or by using a set of rotating mirrors, as shown in
Fig. 24.3-8(6). Another example of a MEMS switch is the digital micromirror device
(DMD) developed at Texas Instruments (Fig. 24.3-9). As shown in the inset, it is
an array of micromirrors, each assuming one of two possible orientations (+12° or
—12°). In one orientation, the mirror deflects incoming light through an imaging lens
that displays a bright spot in the image plane, whereas in the other orientation the
mirror deflects light to a beam dump so that dark spot is displayed in the image
plane. The DMD is a binary (bright/dark) spatial light modulator (SLM) that finds
use in commercial projection systems. A gray value at any spot may be obtained by
modulating the relative time durations of dark and bright.

Mechano-optic switches generally offer low insertion loss and low crosstalk but
have relatively slow response times.

24.3 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1191
<.
- Uy WS,
© = GY Fixed
me _ 3 _fibers
is \WAIEZ 4
Prism а »
Al 24 Index-matching /
—_ liquid
(a) (5) (©)
Figure 24.3-7 Examples of the deflection of light into different directions using mechano-optic
switches. (a) A rotating mirror or prism. (b) A rotating holographic disk; each sector of the disk
contains a grating whose orientation and period determine the scanning plane and scanning angle of
the deflected light. (с) An optical fiber attached to a rotating wheel aligned with one of a number
of optical fibers attached to a fixed wheel; the fibers are placed in V-grooves and an index-matching
liquid is used to ensure good optical coupling.
pita [tour fe
~ Olo~ ¢
об © 4 о
Йо, Movi
Popup : oving
— Af mirrors Mirror < = mirrors
Sz a 2 S
a, LS Control
175 р KE 1
3 oo
4 Controls
(a) (b)
Figure 24.3-8 (a) MEMS popup-mirror switch. (b) MEMS rotating-mirror switch.
Light ar
er a Ё Е
Z М
DMD
ZI a Image
<7 и Г”
ыыы м
Illumination uN
`
Figure 24.3-9 The digital micromirror device (DMD) is an array of micromirrors switched
between two orientations to create a binary image.

1192 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

Electro-Optic Switches

As discussed in Sec. 21.1, the refractive indices of electro-optic materials are altered in
the presence of an electric field. These materials may therefore be used as electrically
controlled phase modulators or wave retarders. When placed in one arm of an interfer-
ometer, or between crossed polarizers, an electro-optic cell can serve as an electrically
controlled light modulator or a 1 x 1 (ON-OFF) switch (Sec. 21.1B).

Since it is difficult to make large arrays of switches using bulk crystals, the most
viable approach to electro-optic switching is via integrated photonics. As described in
Sec. 9.3, integrated-photonic waveguides may be fabricated using electro-optic dielec-
tric substrates such as LiNbOs; the diffusion of titanium into the substrate creates strips
of slightly elevated refractive index that serve as waveguides. An example of a1 x 1
switch using an integrated-photonic Mach—Zehnder interferometer (MZI) is displayed
in Fig. 24.3-10(а) (which reproduces Fig. 21.1-5). A 2 x 2 integrated-photonic switch
can also be fashioned from a MZI, as portrayed in Fig. 24.3-10(0).

The directional coupler discussed in Sec. 21.1D also serves as a 2 x 2 switch. As
indicated in Fig. 24.3-10(c) (which reproduces Fig. 21.1-10), two waveguides can be
optically coupled by placing them in close proximity. The refractive index may then
be altered by applying an electric field, which can be adjusted so that the optical power
either remains in the same waveguide or is transferred to the other waveguide. Switches
such as these operate at a few volts and at bandwidths of tens of GHz.

<input Control = S Control at Control

— >
(a) Output (b) $ Outputs (c) F Outputs
Figure 24.3-10 (a) A 1 x 1 switch using an integrated-photonic Mach-Zehnder interferometer
(MZI). (b) A 2 x 2 switch using an integrated-photonic МИЛ. (с) A 2 x 2 switch using an integrated-
photonic directional coupler.

An N x N integrated-photonic switch can be built by making use of combinations
of 2 x 2 switches. A 4 x 4 switch, for example, may be implemented by using an
arrangement of five 2 x 2 switches, as suggested in Fig. 24.3-3(a). This configuration
can be fabricated on a single substrate in the geometry displayed in Fig. 24.3-11.
Lithium niobate electro-optic switches of size 32 x 32 have been fabricated. The limit
on the number of switches per unit area is governed by the relatively large physical
dimensions of each directional coupler and the planar nature of the interconnections
within the chip. However, intersecting (rather than parallel) waveguides may be used
to reduce the dimensions and increase the switch packing density.

5!
43 SS
>
Figure 24.3-11 Ап пиестае4-рбоютис
<] 4 x 4 switch using five directional couplers
SSS (A, B, C, D, and E) implemented on a single
< SSS 2 substrate.
a

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1193

It is worthy of mention that the rectangular geometry of integrated-photonics tech-
nology makes it difficult to obtain efficient coupling to cylindrical waveguides such as
optical fibers. Relatively large insertion losses are encountered, especially with single-
mode fibers. Also, the coupling coefficient is polarization-dependent, which requires
proper selection of the polarization of the guided light and the use of polarization-
maintaining input and output connecting fibers (Sec. 10.2B). Elaborate schemes are
required to make polarization-independent switches.

Semiconductor Photonic Switches
Electrically controlled semiconductor devices exhibit optical properties that can be ex-
ploited for fast photonic switching. As described in Sec. 21.5, electroabsorption, based
on the Franz—Keldysh effect in bulk semiconductors and on the quantum-confined
Stark effect (QCSE) in multiquantum-well (MQW) structures, is useful for controlling
the absorption of light at wavelengths near the bandgap wavelength by means of an
electric field. Used as 1 x 1 switches, such electrically controlled optical modulators
can exhibit switching times shorter than 20 ps. They can be fabricated in large arrays
and bonded to silicon substrates for operation in a surface-normal configuration, as
illustrated schematically in Fig. 24.3-12.
tit
SS I =
2 № в в Figure 24.3-12 An array of MQW
== 2 ~~ = a switches in a surface-normal configura-
ss SS вы ; IS tion. Operation is based on the QCSE.

Another device available for photonic switching is the semiconductor optical ampli-
fier (SOA). Since the SOA may be rapidly turned on and off by applying and removing
the injected electric current (Sec. 18.2), it can be used as a 1 x 1 switch with switching
times in the nanosecond regime. In the absence of gain (when the device is in the OFF
state) it acts as a strong absorber whereas in the presence of gain (when the device is
in the ON state) it becomes an amplifier; extinction ratios in excess of 40 dB can be
obtained. SOA switches using InGaAsP/InP MQW structures operate at wavelengths
in the vicinity of 1.55 and 1.3 рим (Sec. 18.2D).

Arrays of SOA switches may be fabricated and interconnected via optical fibers, as
illustrated in Fig. 24.3-13. SOAs operated as amplifiers provide gain so they may be
inserted in the circuit to compensate for the large splitting losses. Since SOAs can also
function as wavelength converters, they may be used in wavelength switching where
optical data carried on a carrier of one wavelength are “copied” onto a carrier of a
different wavelength. Because of their nonlinear optical properties, SOAs can also be
operated as ultrafast all-optical switches, as discussed in Sec. 24.3C.

Output 1
Input 2 Output 2
Amplifiers SOA Switches Amplifiers
Figure 24.3-13 A 2 x 2 switch using four 1 x 1 SOA switches in the broadcast-and-select
configuration illustrated in Fig. 24.3-2.

1194 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

Liquid-Crystal Switches

Liquid crystals (LCs) offer yet another technology that can be used to make electrically
controllable photonic switches. As described in Sec. 21.3, a liquid-crystal cell may be
configured to act as an electrically controlled wave retarder or polarization rotator;
these effects may be converted into intensity modulation by use of crossed polarizers.

A compact configuration for implementing a 2 x 2 crossbar LC switch is illustrated
in Fig. 24.3-14. This is a polarization version of the Mach—Zehnder interferometer
displayed in Fig. 24.3-5(c); the LC cell rotates the polarization of the beams in the
interferometer arms by 90° if the control signal is present, thereby switching the con-
nections from the bar to the cross state. The switch is polarization-independent so that
the beams are directed to the desired ports regardless of their polarization state.

LC polarization | Output 1 Figure 24.3-14 АЗХ 2 crossbar liquid-
rotator crystal switch. The two polarization components
PBS of an input beam are separated by the left-hand
Prism polarizing beamsplitter (PBS) and recombined
\ — by the right-hand PBS after passage through
Output 2 the liquid-crystal cell (LC), which serves as a
п/2 polarization rotator if the control signal
Input | is on. Without polarization rotation, the beams
— \ entering at inputs | and 2 are directed to outputs
PBS Prism 1 and 2, respectively, 1.е., the switch is in
the bar state. With polarization rotation, the
1 5 | 4 beams are directed to the opposite output ports,

при Control corresponding to the cross state.

In an alternate switching configuration, the change of the LC refractive index caused
by an applied electric field may be directly used for switching. The incoming light
enters the LC at an angle, via another medium whose refractive index is selected such
that total internal reflection occurs only when the electric field is applied to the LC. A
large array of electrodes placed on a single liquid-crystal panel serves as a set of 1 x 1
switches (a digital spatial light modulator) that may be used in the broadcast-and-select
mode displayed in Fig. 24.3-6 to implement an N x N crossbar switch.

Because of their relatively long switching times, LC switches are used in applica-
tions where speed is not paramount, such as in fault-protection switching and in the re-
configurable optical add—drop multiplexers (ROADMs) used in optical fiber networks
(Sec. 25.5B).

Acousto-Optic Switches

Acousto-optic switches rely on the Bragg diffraction of light by sound (Sec. 20.1A).
The reflectance of the diffracted light is controlled by the intensity of the sound wave
whereas the angle of deflection is controlled by its frequency. An acousto-optic mod-
ulator, such as that displayed in Fig. 24.3-15(a) (which reproduces Fig. 20.1-2) is a
1 x 2 switch. An acousto-optic scanner, such as that illustrated in Fig. 20.2-9, is a
1х N switch. A 2 x 2 switch is portrayed in Fig. 24.3-15(5). If different portions of the
acousto-optic cell carry sound waves of different frequencies, as shown in Fig. 24.3-
15(c) (which reproduces Fig. 20.2-13), the result is an Г x М switch. A bound on the
maximum value of the product Г, М achievable with an acousto-optic device, a quantity
known as the interconnection capacity, is set forth in (20.2-9). Acousto-optic switches
are generally slow since the response time depends on the transit time of sound across
the device. Arrays of acousto-optic cells are also available.

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1195
Е 1 — }
= 2 = | S833
So — — = |
Е =] — I
IT / Lh t= J)
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 24.3-15 Acousto-optic switches. (а) A 1 x 2 switch. (6) A 2 x 2 switch. (©) An L x М
switch.
Magneto-Optic Switches
The optical properties of magneto-optic materials are altered when a magnetic field
is present. Materials exhibiting the Faraday effect, for example, act as polarization
rotators in the presence of a static magnetic flux density B (Sec. 6.4B); the rotatory
power р (angle per unit length) is proportional to the component of B that lies along
the direction of propagation. When the material is placed between crossed polarizers,
the optical power transmittance J = sin? 9 is governed by the polarization rotation
angle 6 = pd, where d is the thickness of the cell. This device can thus serve as a 1 x 1
switch controlled by the magnetic field.

Magneto-optic materials usually take the form of films (e.g., bismuth-substituted
iron garnet) deposited on nonmagnetic substrates. The magnetic field is applied by
making use of a pair of intersecting conductors carrying electric current. A device op-
erates in binary mode by switching the direction of magnetization. Arrays of magneto-
optic switches can be fabricated by etching isolated cells (each of size = 10 wm x
10 wm) ona single film. Conductors for the electric-current drive lines are subsequently
deposited using usual photolithographic techniques. Arrays of such switches (e.g.,
1024 x 1024) are available and operate at switching times of = 100 ns. Devices have
also been developed that make use of plasmonic effects. Magneto-optic materials are
also used for optical-disc recording, but in that case the process relies on a thermo-
magnetic effect whereby the magnetization is altered by heating with a strong focused
laser; weak linearly polarized laser light is used for readout.

Thermo-Optic Switches

Thermo-optic switches usually operate on the basis of the thermo-optic effect, which
is a modification of the refractive index of a material caused by a change in its tem-
perature. The temperature change results in a density change that in turn gives rise to
an index change. The resulting index modification is almost always small, however,
so that thermo-optic switches are usually operated in an interferometric configuration.
For example, the thermo-optic coefficient of silica glass is ап/АТ = 10~° per °C,
although polymers often exhibit larger values.

Thermo-optic integrated-photonic switches are fabricated in fiber-matched silica-
on-Si (SOS) waveguide configurations. An example is the Mach—Zehnder interfer-
ometer (MZJ) switch illustrated in Fig. 24.3-16. A thin-film metal heater deposited
directly on the waveguide in one of the interferometer branches is used to control
the temperature of the material. A temperature change AT results in a phase shift
(27L/Xr.)An = (27L/X.)(dn/dT)AT, where Г, is the length of the heated region.
In a silica-based switch with Г/Л = 2 x 103, for example, the temperature change
required to introduce a phase shift of 7 is АТ = 25° С. Other interferometric switching
configurations based on arrayed waveguides (AWG) have also been fabricated using
both silica and polymeric waveguides. The principal limitation of these switches is
long switching time (А ms) but they are suitable for applications such as reconfiguring
light paths in optical networks.

1196 — CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

A different kind of thermo-optic switching technology is based on the induction of
changes in the refractive index of a fluid by a bubble jet initiated by a microheater. As
illustrated in Fig. 24.3-17, the resulting refractive-index change in the fluid vacates its
index-matching functionality and renders it a total internal reflector instead.

2 THe Fluid of
1 rece | [ия Microheater
Index n ubbles

Figure 24.3-16 Thermo-optic Mach-Zehnder Figure 24.3-17 Bubble-jet switch.
interferometer (MZI) switch.
C. All-Optical Space Switches
All-optical space switches, also called opto-optic space switches, operate by making
use of a nonlinear optical material or device that allows light to control light. The
controlling light alters a particular optical property of the nonlinear material, which in
turn modifies an attribute of the controlled (signal) light such as its phase, frequency, or
polarization. The modified attribute is then used to block the transmission of, or redirect
the path of, the signal light. The control and signal light must be distinguishable by at
least one feature, e.g., wavelength, polarization, or direction. The nonlinear process
may be nonparametric or parametric (Chapter 22) and the configuration may be non-
interferometric or interferometric.

As an adjunct to the parameters listed in Sec. 24.3A under the rubric photonic switch
characteristics, the principal parameters that characterize an all-optical switch are:
1) area illuminated by the control light, 2) intensity of the control light, 3) switching
energy, 4) switching time, and 5) extinction ratio. The ideal all-optical switch is an
ultracompact device that operates with ultralow control-light intensity and ultralow
switching energy at an ultrashort switching time and with high extinction ratio.

Devices that are currently used as all-optical switches include: 1) semiconductor
optical amplifiers (SOAs) and 2) nonlinear optical waveguides and fibers. Micro-
and nanostructures that make use of solitons, photonic crystals, plasmonic structures,
metamaterials, and ring nanocavities promise stronger nonlinearities, lower operating
power, and shorter switching times.

SOA Switches

Electrically controlled semiconductor photonic switches were discussed in Sec. 24.3B.
In this section we turn to all-optical semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA) switches
that operate via nonparametric nonlinear processes: cross-gain modulation (XGM)
and cross-phase modulation (XPM).

In a XGM-SOA switch [Fig. 24.3-18(a)], the control light has higher power than
the signal light, and the two are distinguished by different frequencies or different
polarizations. When the control light is absent the signal light is amplified; when it is
present the amplifier is saturated and its gain is substantially reduced because of carrier-
density depletion, resulting in the absence of amplification. High and low values of the
output signal represent the ON and OFF states of the switch, respectively. The contrast
ratio between these states typically lies in the range of 10-20 dB.

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1197
In a XPM-SOA switch [Fig. 24.3-18(6)], the amplifier is unsaturated and the control
light, if present, alters the refractive index of the SOA, which is dependent on the
carrier density. The signal light then undergoes a phase shift that is sensed by an
interferometer. If the presence of the control light results in a phase difference between
the interferometer branches that changes from 0 to 7, the signal light is directed from
one output port to the other and the device functions as a 1 x 2 switch. Although SOAs
are compact devices and can be integrated in arrays, their switching time is limited to
the 10-100-ps range.
I Output Input pip м л—
nput 18:

w, А Я é Л^. 1 П n
Control А Filter “ Control Output
“> SOA 2 SOA we

(a) (Б)
Figure 24.3-18 SOA all-optical switches. (а) А 1 x 1 switch based оп cross-gain modulation
(XGM). (b) A 1 x 2 switch makes use of cross-phase modulation (XPM) and a Mach—Zehnder
interferometer (MZI).
Parametric Switches
As described in Chapter 22, second- and third-order nonlinear materials support nu-
merous nonlinear parametric wave-mixing effects, including sum-frequency genera-
tion (SFG), optical Kerr effect, self-phase modulation (SPM), cross-phase modulation
(XPM), cross-gain modulation (XGM), four-wave mixing (FWM), optical frequency
conversion (OFC), as well as optical solitons. A number of all-optical switches and
gates are based on these effects.
SFG switch. Illustrated in Fig. 24.3-19 is an example of a switch based on sum-
frequency generation (SFG) in a second-order nonlinear waveguide such as a period-
ically poled lithium niobate (PPLN) crystal (Sec. 22.2E). If the quasi-phase matching
condition is satisfied, the signal and control waves, of frequencies ил and we, гезрес-
tively, generate a new wave at the sum frequency w3 = ил + We. The two original
waves are depleted in the process, but this only happens when both the signal and
control waves are present. Hence, in the presence of the control wave, the signal wave is
extinguished whereas in the absence of the control wave, the signal wave is transmitted
through the waveguide without depletion. The SFG process therefore serves as a 1 x 1
switch governed by the control wave.
Ww) Output
Input Л “> DE Figure 24.3-19 An all-optical 1 x 1 switch
НТ — с ИИ based on depletion resulting from parametric
Control ] \ > Filter sum-frequency generation (SFG) in a second-
Wy . :
order nonlinear waveguide (WG).

XPM-MZI switch. As illustrated in Fig. 24.3-20, the refractive index of a third-
order nonlinear medium that exhibits cross-phase modulation (XPM), such as a highly
nonlinear fiber (HNLF), is altered by the control wave. The phase of the signal wave
is thus modified and this is sensed by a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) that
directs the signal wave to either of the two output ports, depending on the presence
or absence of the control wave. The control wave is distinguished from the signal wave
by its different frequency and a filter is used to permit only the signal wave to pass
through the interferometer. The result is a 1 x 2 switch governed by the presence or
absence of the control wave.

1198 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
Input fiber Output 1
SDN с oa Figure 24.3-20 An all-optical 1 x 2 switch
wy Wy based on cross-phase modulation (XPM) in
TS a highly nonlinear fiber (HNLF) placed in a
“2 fl HNLF Filters О, ри 5 Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI).
Control SL
Wy Wy
XPM microring switch. An integrated-optic dielectric microring resonator, such as
that displayed in Fig. 11.0-1(6), whose resonance frequency is optically controllable
can be used as an ultracompact, all-optical switch. As illustrated in Fig. 24.3-21, the
input (signal) and control waves are guided through straight waveguide segments ad-
jacent to the microring. In the absence of the control wave, the input wave is coupled
into the resonator, which is designed to have a matching resonance frequency, and
is dropped. The presence of the control wave introduces a refractive index change
An = nol via the optical Kerr effect (Sec. 22.3A), which alters the resonance fre-
quency of the resonator proportionally. Being off-resonance, the signal wave is then
no longer coupled to the resonator and is fully transmitted to the output. The result is
a 1 x 1 switch governed by the presence or absence of the control wave. Microring
switches have been successfully implemented in Ш-У semiconductors and in silicon-
on-insulator (SOD technology. Though the Kerr effect in crystalline silicon is small,
other nonlinear mechanisms give rise to a sizable intensity-dependent refractive index
in Si: free-carrier effects and two-photon absorption (Example 16.3-4) and the thermo-
optic effect (Sec. 24.3B). Switching times of 25 ps at 1.55 zm have been demonstrated.
Figure 24.3-21 An all-optical 1 x 1 switch
kn) / based on altering the resonance frequency of
Sy а microring resonator via a change in refrac-
tive index effected by the control wave. The
signal wave is blocked when its frequency is
Drop Control on-resonance, and transmitted when it is off-
—_ resonance.
XPM retardation switch. This switch is based on the optical Kerr effect in an
anisotropic nonlinear medium. Propagation of the control wave through such a medium
creates different changes in the principal refractive indices so that the medium serves as
a wave retarder for the signal (input) wave, thereby changing its state of polarization. If
a birefringent crystal or HNLF is placed between crossed polarizers it can then function
as an all-optical ON-OFF switch. When the retardation is 0, the input wave is blocked
and the switch is in the OFF state and when the control wave provides a retardation
of 7, the signal wave is transmitted and the switch is in the ON state. Alternatively, a
polarizing beam splitter (PBS) can be used to direct the output from one port to another
as the control wave is turned оп or off. This 1 x 2 switch is illustrated in Fig. 24.3-22.
et Polarizer . Output 1
Filter PBS_ /\__ Роше 24.3-22 An all-optical 1 x 2 switch
р based on cross-phase modulation (XPM), which
Л HNLE Output 2 Л. alters the retardation in a birefringent HNLF.
Control

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1199
XPM frequency-shifting switch. The non-interferometric configuration illustrated
in Fig. 24.3-23 may be used for switching ultrashort light pulses. As described in
Sec. 23.1A, a phase shift that varies linearly with time is equivalent to a frequency
shift proportional to the slope of the control pulse power profile. Accordingly, the time-
varying intensity at one edge of the control optical pulse introduces, via XPM, a time-
varying phase and an associated frequency shift in the signal pulse. An appropriate
bandpass filter (BPF) is used to block the frequency-shifted wave. When the control
pulse is absent, the frequency shift does not occur and the signal pulse is transmitted.
Input w, Output w,
DWN NX
© Figure 24.3-23 An all-optical 1 x 1 switch
HINLF based on the frequency shift introduced by cross-
СЛ ] \ phase modulation (XPM) near the edge of the
Control 25 Wy wy control pulse in a highly nonlinear fiber (HNLF).
FWM switch. A switch based on four-wave mixing (FWM) (Sec. 22.3D) in a non-
linear optical fiber is illustrated in Fig. 24.3-24. Signal (input) and control waves with
frequencies ил and we, respectively, are launched into the fiber. As they co-propagate,
they generate two new waves with frequencies из and wy satisfying the FWM condition
ил + We = w3 + 4, and both the signal and control waves are depleted in the process.
The system is much like a depleted-pump optical parametric amplifier (OPA) in which
the two incoming waves act as pumps. This effect can also be regarded as an example
of XGM. The amount of depletion can be signal by adjusting the power of the incoming
waves. When the control wave is absent, the signal wave emerges with no significant
loss since the parametric interaction process is thwarted.
Input w, Output w}
ие ©) Filter I\~ Figure 24.3-24 An all-optical 1 x 1 switch
( ) based on depletion of the signal wave caused by
HNLF four-wave mixing (FWM) in the presence of the
Л Г \ control wave in a highly nonlinear fiber (HNLF).
Control > wy w3w4w2
Soliton Switches
Optical solitons are ultrashort pulses that propagate in nonlinear dispersive optical
fibers without spreading (Sec. 23.5B). An all-optical switch may be realized by using
one optical soliton to control the routing of another. The interaction between the two
solitons may take the form of a collision or a recombination into a single vector soliton.
In either case, some optical property of the input soliton is changed by the interaction,
and the altered property is used to effect the routing.
Soliton-collision switch. If two solitons with slightly different frequencies, and
hence slightly different group velocities, collide (pass through one another), the arrival
time and the phase are altered for each soliton. One of the pulses serves as the control
pulse, and the other as the signal pulse. Either the time delay or the phase shift that
accompanies the collision with the control pulse is used to route the signal pulse.
Time-based routing is implemented by making use of an optical gate that opens
during a prescribed time window. Phase-based routing is effected by making use of an
interferometer.

1200 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

Vector-soliton switch. A vector soliton comprises two orthogonally polarized opti-
cal pulses copropagating through a nonlinear birefringent fiber. Since both pulses must
be present for the vector soliton to form, the system may be used as a photonic switch
with one pulse serving to control the other.

Two pulses with orthogonal polarizations travel in a birefringent fiber at slightly
different group velocities and therefore separate in time, a phenomenon known as
walk-off (Sec. 23.5A). If the fiber is also nonlinear, cross-phase modulation (XPM)
(Sec. 22.3C) results in a frequency upshift in one pulse and a frequency downshift in
the other. Because of group velocity dispersion (GVD), these shifts are accompanied
by a change in the group velocities. When the group velocity difference due to the
birefringence is exactly compensated by that due to GVD (via XPM), the two pulses
travel jointly as a single vector soliton, a condition also known as soliton trapping.

As illustrated in Fig. 24.3-25, a 1 x 1 vector-soliton switch may be implemented by
using one of the two orthogonally polarized pulses as the control pulse, and the other
as the signal to be transmitted or blocked. If the two pulses have the same wavelength
A, when traveling through the nonlinear birefringent fiber they form a vector soliton
whose components have wavelengths shifted to Л + 6A. One of these components 1$
selected by a filter and constitutes the output of the switch. In the absence of the control
pulse, the vector soliton is not formed and the wavelength is not shifted, in which case
the light is blocked by the filter.

Vector soliton
Input Slow | | | Л-бА Output
r \ / \ 7. \ Filter { A= 6A
ty Fast ac = SAA + 5A | ||

м А Birefringent HNLF

Figure 24.3-25 An all-optical switch using vector solitons in a highly nonlinear fiber (HNLF).
Photonic-Crystal and Plasmonic Switches
The optical Kerr effect may also be used in various all-optical switches implemented
in photonic crystal and plasmonic nanostructures and microstructures. In these devices
the control light alters the refractive index of the dielectric material, thereby altering a
characteristic of the structure through which the signal light propagates. The result is
that the light is either transmitted (ON state) or blocked (OFF state).
Photonic-crystal switches. As described in Sec. 7.2, photonic crystals are periodic
structures characterized by bandgaps, i.e., frequency bands within which light cannot
propagate. The bandgaps can be frequency shifted by altering the refractive index of
the material. In the absence of the control light, the frequency of the signal light lies
inside the bandgap, but near its edge, so the light cannot propagate and the switch is
in the OFF state. When the control light is applied, the bandgap is shifted so that the
frequency of the signal light falls outside the bandgap and the light can propagate, so
the switch is converted to the ON state. An all-optical switch may also be implemented
by using a photonic-crystal nanocavity formed by a lattice defect. Since the resonance
frequency of the nanocavity mode depends on the refractive index of the material, it can
be altered by the control light. The optical signal then will or will not be coupled to the
nanocavity depending on whether its frequency matches or mismatches the nanocavity
resonance frequency, thereby enabling switching action. Experimental demonstrations
of photonic-crystal, all-optical switching with response times in the subpicosecond
range and pump powers of kW/cm? have been reported.

24.3 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1201
Plasmonic switches. The resonance frequency of a surface plasmon polariton
(SPP) mode is highly sensitive to the permittivity of the adjacent dielectric material
(Sec. 8.2B), which can be altered by the control light via the optical Kerr effect. The
signal light is coupled to the SPP mode, and the switch is in the OFF state when its
frequency matches that of the of the SPP mode. Otherwise, the signal light propagates
uninterrupted (ON state). Plasmonic all-optical switches are suitable for integrated-
photonic implementations and offer subpicosecond response times that are limited by
the relaxation time of the plasmonic resonance. However, typical propagation distances
of propagating SPP waveguides are rather short because of metallic losses.
Switching Time
The switching time of an all-optical switch is limited by the duration of the con-
trol optical pulse and the response time of the nonlinear process responsible for the
switching action. Since ultrashort optical pulses of a few femtoseconds duration (a few
optical cycles) are readily available, the much slower nonlinear interaction process sets
the ultimate limit on the switching time, which is highly dependent on the switching
material.

Semiconductors such as GaAs, InSb, InAs, and CdS exhibit strong optical nonlin-
earities as a result of excitonic effects at wavelengths near the band edges. Switch-on
times are typically on the order of a few picoseconds while switch-off times, dominated
by relatively slow carrier recombination, typically extend to hundred picoseconds.
Semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA) switches based on XGM and XPM are sim-
ilarly limited by the intrinsically slow recovery time of the amplifier gain, exhibiting
switch-off times in the 10—100-ps range. In contrast, switches based on XPM and FWM
in highly nonlinear optical fibers have far shorter response times, typically < 100 fs.
Switches that make use of fiber soliton technology also operate at sub-picosecond
switching times.

The non-symmetric nature of the temporal response of the nonlinear effect in semi-
conductors (short rise time at the onset of the control optical pulse and a far longer
decay time following removal of the pulse) can be exploited in designing switches
whose switching times are limited by the short rise time rather than by the long decay
time, as described in Example 24.3-1.
ПИ
EXAMPLE 24.3-1. Ultrafast Nonlinear Asymmetric Sagnac Interferometer Switch.
The response time of XPM in a third-order nonlinear-optical material is characterized by a short rise
time and a long decay time. The switching time can be reduced by making use of an interferometric
configuration in which both branches of the interferometer include the same nonlinear element but
the signal light pulse crosses it at different times. This is readily implemented by a fiber Sagnac
interferometer with a nonlinear optical element placed at an asymmetric location within the fiber
loop, as illustrated in Fig. 24.3-26. When the input signal pulse enters the loop from fiber 1, it is split
by a symmetric coupler into a clockwise pulse and a counterclockwise pulse of equal amplitudes. If
the two pulses encounter the same phase shift as they make their round-trip paths around the loop,
they recombine and return back into fiber 1 and exit from output port 1. If they undergo phase shifts
differing by п, on the other hand, they recombine and emerge into fiber 2 and exit from output port 2.
These are the two states of a 1 x 2 switch.

The nonlinear element is controlled by a short control optical pulse that changes its refractive
index Бу An. This change builds up with a short rise time t; and decays with a much longer relaxation
time t,.. Since the nonlinear element is placed at an offset location within the fiber loop, the two signal
pulses cross it at different times, т! and 72. If both pulses cross the nonlinear element when it is active,
ie., in the presence of the full change An, they undergo the same phase shift and the recombined
pulse is received in fiber 1. This also occurs if both pulses cross the nonlinear element when it is
inactive. However, if one pulse crosses when the nonlinear element is active and the other when it is
inactive, they undergo different phase shifts, and if the phase difference is 7, the pulse enters fiber 2,
and emerges from output port 2. The switching action is therefore governed by the time difference

1202 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
T, — T2, which is proportional to the distance of the nonlinear element from the mid-point of the fiber
loop. If т! — 72 is slightly greater than the rise time ¢;, the switching action can be controlled with
precision limited by the rise time, instead of by the full response time t,.. Femtosecond switching
times have been achieved, so that the switch can be operated at terahertz bandwidths. This switch
has been used for time-division demultiplexing and is known as the Terahertz Optical Asymmetric
Demultiplexer (TOAD)."
hop An 1
Сир Nonlinear Oe tet
= Symmetric element re t
Output 2 Nt —
— Fiber 2 Fiber jp NO" =
Control => loop пт о t
Figure 24.3-26 An all-optical-fiber nonlinear asymmetric Sagnac interferometer used as a 1 x 2
switch. The switch is controlled by an optical pulse that initiates a refractive index change An ina
nonlinear element placed at an offset location within the interferometer loop. The input pulse coming
from fiber 1 is split into clockwise and counterclockwise pulses that traverse the nonlinear element at
different times. The switch changes the connection from output port 1 to output port 2 if one of these
pulses arrives just before, and the other just after, the onset of An. This results in a phase difference
of z and a diversion of the output pulse to output port 2.
«И
Switching Energy
The switching energy Е = TAT, is the product of the switching time T, the switch
area illuminated by the control light A, and the intensity of the control light Г.. Аз
indicated previously, the minimum switching time is limited by the response time of
the nonlinear process underlying the switching action. Limits on the switch area are
governed by diffraction effects, which make it difficult to couple optical power into and
out of devices whose dimensions are smaller than a wavelength of light. If T and A are
maintained at their lowest possible values, further reduction in the switching energy E
can be achieved by making use of a material with stronger nonlinearity, i.e., a material
that requires a lower intensity J, for operation at a high switching efficiency. Certain
device configurations, such as those making use of resonant-cavity-enhanced nonlinear
interactions, can enhance the effective nonlinearity, but they have the concomitant
property of prolonging the response time. In the extreme limit of Т = 10 fs and
A = 1 pm’, operation with a small switching energy Е = 1 В requires a control-
beam intensity Г = 1 kW/cm2, which is modest for conventional nonlinear materials.
The switching energy of GaAs devices typically lies in the range 1—10 pJ, but it is in
principle possible to reduce it to the fJ regime. InGaAsP optical amplifiers have been
operated with switching energies less than | fJ, but doing so comes at the expense of
switching times of hundreds of ps. Switches that make use of solitons in optical fibers
have also been implemented with switching energies in the range of tens of pJ.
Quantum limit. The minimum switching energy is ultimately limited by the photon
nature of light and its inherent uncertainty, which is particularly evident at low light
energies. A switching energy E = 20 aJ, for example, corresponds to an average
photon number 7 = E/hv = 100 at Л. = 1 yum, but the actual photon number п
* See J.P. Sokoloff, P. R. Prucnal, I. Glesk, and M. Kane, A Terahertz Optical Asymmetric Demultiplexer
(TOAD), IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 5, pp. 787—790, 1993.

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1203

is random. If the light arises from a laser or an LED, the photon number n is Poisson
distributed with mean п = 100 and width Уп = 10, as is understood from Sec. 13.2C.
Thus, if the switch is designed to be activated when a fixed threshold number of
photons is received, there is always a finite probability that the actual number of
photons falls below that threshold and the switch fails. This type of switching error
can be minimized by making use of greater switching energies. A switching energy
Е = 1 fJ, for example, corresponds to a larger mean photon number, 7 = 5000, and
a relatively narrower uncertainty ~ 70 photons. In that case, the switching error is
minimal and switch activation almost always occurs when desired.
Heat dissipation. An important practical limit on all-optical switching arises from
the difficulty of thermally transferring the heat dissipated by the switching process.
This limitation is particularly severe when the switching is carried out at the maximum
allowed switching rate. With a switching energy Е, a switching time 7, and a maxi-
mum switching rate of 1/27 operations per second, the power dissipated is E/2T, a
heat load that can be substantial for large values of E and small values of T. The need
to remove this dissipated power can make the combination of very high switching
energies and very short switching times difficult. Thermal effects are less restrictive
when the switch is operated below its maximum permitted repetition rate, of course,
since the energy associated with each switching operation then has more time to be
dissipated.

A key issue pertaining to the usefulness of photonic switches is the ability to fabri-
cate them in large arrays on a single chip. Again, heat dissipation can be a limiting
factor; for an array of N switches per unit area, the total power density required
to be removed is NE/2T. Consider, for example, an array of 100 x 100 switching
elements on a 1-сп? GaAs chip, so that N = 104 cm~?. If the switching energy
Е = 1 pJ and the switching time T = 50 ps, then the power required to be removed
is NE/2T = 100 W/ cm”, which is manageable with good thermal engineering. Such
a chip can carry out N/2T = 1014 switching operations per second, which is large in
comparison with electronic supercomputers.

D. Wavelength-Selective Switches
The switches described to this point are space-domain switches, meaning that they
establish transmission paths that route optical beams among specific physical posi-
tions (the input and output ports of the switch). Their wavelength-domain logical
counterparts, known as wavelength-selective switches (WSSs), are illustrated by the
following examples:
ии |
EXAMPLE 24.3-2. Reconfigurable Wavelength Selector. The wavelength selector dis-
played in Fig. 24.3-27 is an example of an optical device that makes use of a combination of passive
wavelength routers and space switches. This switch selects one or more wavelengths from an in-
coming beam with N wavelengths. It uses a demultiplexer (DMUX) to separate the № wavelength
components, followed by a set of N 1 x 1 switches to select the desired wavelengths, and then a
multiplexer (MUX) to reconstitute the output beam, as shown in the figure.

A

Ag
Ay,do, ... Ay Ay .Ay, ... Ay
ee Figure 24.3-27 А reconfigurable

- wavelength selector.
DMUX 1x1 switches MUX

1204 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
EXAMPLE 24.3-3. Reconfigurable Optical Add-Drop Multiplexer (ROADM). The
ROADM is a reconfigurable OADM with the option to add, drop, or pass-through specific wavelength
channels, as illustrated in Fig. 24.3-28. It uses a demultiplexer (DMUX) and a multiplexer (MUX),
along with a 1 x 2 switch and a 2 x 1 switch for each add—drop channel. The ROADM is the
core element of wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) networks (Sec. 25.3C). It acts on each
wavelength in an incoming optical fiber by either allowing it to pass or routing it to a drop fiber,
which directs it to another client or to an outgoing fiber connected to another node in the network.
Data in the dropped wavelength may be replaced by new data added from another fiber carrying
data from another client or another node. ROADMs deployed in early fiber networks used free-
beam diffraction gratings as demultiplexers and multiplexers along with arrays of transmissive liquid
crystal shutters as switches. These configurations are bidirectional, handling both left-to-right and
right-to-left traffic. ROADMs that are deployed in more modern and larger networks use so-called
multi-degree ROADMs (M-ROADMs), which provide wavelength-based interconnection among
three or more intersecting fiber routes. The switching core requires an N x N WSS, which is often
implemented by a bank of 1 x N WSSs, each using a route-and-select design based on beam-steering
elements such as metal micromirrors or diffractive arrays of liquid-crystal cells.
Ai A
Ay dy. day Lo т Ay da. day
< 1 Pass- 1 №.
№ i = through |-> : 7 Figure 24.3-28 А reconfig-
urable optical add-drop multi-
Switch Switch plexer (ROADM).
DMUX Aj Ai MUX
Drop Add
EXAMPLE 24.3-4. Wavelength-Channel Interchange (WCI). The WCI switch, also
called the A switch, routes data between wavelength channels in the same optical beam. An N x N
WCI switch may be implemented by mapping the wavelength channels to the space domain using
a demultiplexer, converting the wavelengths using a bank of № wavelength converters (WCs), and
recombining the channels into a single beam by use of an N x 1 coupler, as shown in Fig. 24.3-29.
A wavelength converter changes the wavelength of a beam without altering the data, i.e., it “copies”
the data from one wavelength channel to another.
иититм Л eo Л See
|1 Coro ); «Г Л! ит м i}
ГТГ \y «Г Л› ST
Ay А № ... АМ МОХ Wes MUX Ay № Аз ... АМ
Figure 24.3-29 Implementation of а wavelength-channel interchange (WCI). Data bits are
depicted as colored and white squares. In this example, data in wavelength channel 2 (green) of
the input beam are routed to wavelength channel 3 (yellow) of the output beam. This switch is
implemented by use of a wavelength demultiplexer to separate and direct the wavelength channels to
a bank of wavelength converters. A fan-in N x 1 coupler recombines the switched channels into a
single beam.
ии |
Multidimensional Space—Wavelength Switches
The previous examples of wavelength-domain switches involve a single optical beam
with multiple wavelength channels. Switching may also be applied to multichannel
multiple beams. Consider, for example, the switching of N beams, each with one of
N wavelength channels. The switch redistributes the wavelength channels among the
beams. Two implementations are displayed in Fig. 24.3-30.

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1205

The first implementation uses a broadcast-and-select router to redirect the wave-
length channels to different ports. This is accomplished by means of a star coupler that
broadcasts the contents of all № beams to every one of a set of wavelength filters, each
of which is tuned to a single wavelength channel [Fig. 24.3-30(a)]. Finally, for further
processing, the wavelengths of the switched channels are converted to the original
wavelengths (without changing their data content), by use of a bank of wavelength
converters (WCs).

The second implementation makes use of two sets of WCs with an arrayed wave-
guides (AWG) router placed between them, as portrayed in Fig. 24.3-30(b). The first
WC converts the wavelengths to values that satisfy the AWG equation (24.2-7) for the
appropriate destinations. The AWG switch is more efficient than the broadcast-and-
select switch since the latter wastes considerable power at the filters. However, the
broadcast-and-select switch has the advantage of being reconfigurable.

ae ни Aw a ГА

о АЕ: eS =»

№ OK [I : [I № Е . Awc ГЕ №

Aw AN oe Aw Ay Го To vw

Star Tunable WCs WCs WCs

(a) coupler filters (b)
Figure 24.3-30 (a) Broadcast-and-select space—wavelength switch. (5) Arrayed waveguides
(AWG) space—wavelength switch.
Implementations of Wavelength Converters
A wavelength converter (WC) transfers data carried by an optical beam at one wave-
length to a different wavelength. The wavelengths often represent the channels of a
WDM optical fiber communication system (Sec. 25.3C); their wavelength separation is
then not large since they lie in the same band. Wavelength converters are implemented
by making use of nonlinear optical devices, nonparametric or parametric, similar to
those described in Sec. 24.3C for all-optical switching.
SOA WCs _Innonparametric WCs, the intensity of the first beam, which is modulated
by the data, is used to alter an optical property of a medium, such as the gain coefficient,
absorption coefficient, or refractive index of a semiconductor, in proportion to the
intensity, so that the data is “written” into the medium. A second beam of different
wavelength transmitted through the medium is then modulated by the altered property,
so that the data are “read” by, and transferred to, the second beam.

An example is the process of cross gain modulation (XGM) in a saturated semi-
conductor optical amplifier (SOA), for which the gain is a decreasing function of
the intensity, as depicted in Fig. 24.3-31(a). When the original intensity-modulated
beam is transmitted through this device, the gain is modulated as an inverted function,
and so is the intensity of the read beam. Another example is the process of cross-
phase modulation (XPM) in an unsaturated SOA, for which the refractive index is
modulated by the write beam since it is dependent on the carrier density. The read
beam is therefore phase modulated. An interferometer must be employed to convert
the phase modulation into intensity modulation, as depicted in Fig. 24.3-31(6).
Parametric WCs. In a WC based on a parametric interaction, beams of different
wavelengths are coupled via the nonlinear effect. In a second-order nonlinear medium

1206 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
(Sec. 22.2), for example, a wave of frequency w; may be downconverted to a frequency
(2 = из — ил with the help of an auxiliary wave of frequency из. The amplitude
of the downconverted wave is related to that of the original wave, so that the data
embedded in the magnitude or in the phase of the original wave are transferred to the
downconverted wave. The principal difficulty of using this three-wave mixing process
is that if the frequencies ил and wz are close to each other, the frequency w3 of the
auxiliary wave must be approximately twice as large. If it is desired to use only waves
of approximately the same frequencies, a cascade of two nonlinear parametric pro-
cesses may be implemented. The first process could be a second-harmonic generation
(SHG) process in which ил is converted to 2w1, while the second process is a three-
wave-mixing downconversion process in which a wave of frequency wz = 2w3 — ил is
generated. All three waves now have approximately the same frequency.
Alternatively, a four-wave mixing (FWM) process implemented via a third-order
nonlinearity, such as occurs in optical fibers, may be implemented, as displayed in
Fig. 24.3-31(c). As described in Sec. 22.3D, this process involves the mixing of four-
waves of frequencies satisfying the relation ил + wo = из + wy. In the partially-
degenerate case we have из = ил = Wo, So that we = 2% — ил.
|-
aN Ги
MZI
Intensity wy о wo
ПМП soa olen. SOA
(a) XGM (b) XPM (©) FWM
Figure 24.3-31 Wavelength conversion. Data is transferred from a beam of frequency и to a beam
of frequency и. (a) Cross-gain modulation (XGM) in a saturated semiconductor optical amplifier
(SOA). (6) Cross-phase modulation (XPM) in an unsaturated SOA. The phase modulation of the
converted beam is transformed into intensity modulation by use of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer
(MZI). (с) Partially-degenerate four-wave mixing (FWM) in a third-order nonlinear medium, such as
an optical fiber, using an auxiliary wave of frequency wp = 5 (wi + Wp).
E. Time-Domain Switches
The time-domain switch routes signals between time slots, as illustrated in Fig. 24.3-
32. In digital communication systems, a signal is divided into a sequence of time frames
of equal duration, each of which is divided into N time slots where the data reside. An
example of a time-domain switch is the time-slot interchange (TSI) switch, which
transfers the data resident in the th time slot of each frame to the mth time slot of the
same frame. This is analogous to the wavelength-channel interchange (WCI) switch
described in Example 24.3-4.
I I | | 1 |
3 3 12 3. MN Го М
м м t t
(a) Space switch (b) Time switch
Figure 24.3-32 Correspondence between time- and space-domain switches. (a) Space-domain
switch. In the example shown, data in line 2 are routed to line 3. (6) Time-domain switch
implementing a time-slot interchange (TSI). In the example shown, data in time slot 2 are routed
to time-slot 3 in each frame.

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1207

Two-dimensional space-time switches employ а combination of time-domain and
space-domain switches. The switch connects a set of input lines, each carrying a digital
signal composed of a sequence of time frames, to a similar set of output lines. Data
in each time slot of each input line are transferred to one, or several, time slots in
one or several output lines, in accordance with a prescribed rule. An example is the
time—space-time (TST) switch, which consists of a cascade of a time-slot interchange
(TSD, a space switch, and another TSI, as shown in Fig. 24.3-33.

ни Е^ ЕЕ инь

ни Seas === eae

В “ a... “ В

aie aN ЕЕ
Time switch Space switch Time switch
Figure 24.3-33 Time-space-time (TST) switch.

Time-Division Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
A simple example of a space-time switch is the time-division demultiplexer. It has one
input line and N output lines, where N is the number of time slots in each frame. The
switch routes data in the ¢th time slot of the input line to the @ time slot of the éth
output line; @ = 1,2,..., №. The process is repeated periodically in all frames. This
switch is therefore equivalent to a time-to-space mapping.

In the time-division demultiplexer shown in Fig. 24.3-34, for example, there are
N = Atime slots per frame. The slots contain data that takes the form of pulses of
various heights. The switch directs the first pulse to the first output port, and the second
pulse to the second output port, and so on. Such a switch could be constructed by use
of a 1 x М space switch connecting the input port sequentially to one of its four output
ports.

The inverse of the time-division demultiplexer, called a time-division multiplexer
(TDM), interleaves pulses from N separate ports to form a single sequence of pulses
at one output port. This inverse operation is readily visualized in Fig. 24.3-34 by
exchanging the roles of the input and output ports so that the pulses travel from right-
to-left, instead of from left-to-right. The 1 x N time-division demultiplexer may be
implemented by making use of М 1 x 1 ON-OFF switches, as illustrated in Fig. 24.3-
2(a), that are turned on and off sequentially with control pulses from a clock.

: 1 : : : р : : : :
fof 6b Ea EE GG
4a fe ig

Figure 24.3-34 Time-division demultiplexing with N = 4.

1208 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
Optical Time-Division Multiplexing (OTDM)
An optical implementation of the TDM is illustrated in Fig. 24.3-35(a). Copies of the
input beam are transmitted through a set of N 1 x 1 photonic switches controlled
by a set of optical pulses from a clock delayed by multiples of the time delay T/N,
where T is the frame period. In an alternate implementation, portrayed in Fig. 24.3-
35(b), copies of the input beam are successively delayed by multiples of T/N so
that the N input pulses are separated in space but synchronized in time; the 1 x
1 switches are controlled by the same clock signal. The system is similar to that
used to detect the temporal profile of a single optical pulse (Fig. 23.6-5). Optical
delays may be implemented by using lengths of optical fiber (approximately 5 ns/m
for silica-glass fibers). The 1 x 1 switches may be implemented optically by using an
all-optical nonlinear interferometric switch such as the Terahertz Optical Asymmetric
Demultiplexer (TOAD) discussed in Example 24.3-1.
1 x 1 switches _ Optical delays _! x 1 switches
= = =
| в = A =
ЕЕ Wooo ГА
т 37/4
Stat Star
coupler T/4 coupler ry
— J OIOIO ZO
(et Optical delays (et — —
coupler
(a) (b)
Figure 24.3-35 Two implementations of time-division demultiplexing using star couplers, optical
time delays, and 1 x 1 photonic switches. In this illustration, N = 4.
Optical Time-Slot Interchange (TSI)
The TSI switch that was shown in Fig. 24.3-32 is a time-domain switch that inter-
changes data within the time slots of each frame. Optical implementations may be
effected by combining space and space-time switches. The configuration schematized
in Fig. 24.3-36, for example, relies on the following sequence of switches: 1) a time-
division demultiplexer (DMUX) that routes the time slots to separate lines in space
(time-to-space mapping); 2) time delays to synchronize the pulses in a single time slot
of duration T/N; 3) an N x М cross-connect space switch to implement the desired
interchanges; 4) a second set of time delays to restore the pulses to their original time
slots; and 5) a time-division multiplexer (MUX) to bring these time slots to a single
time line (space-to-time mapping).
(J) 37/4 1 7, |
1234) (OZ >< el 3142
о
Time-to-space Delays Space Switch Delays Space-to-time
Figure 24.3-36 An implementation of optical time-slot interchange (TSI).

243 PHOTONIC SWITCHES 1209
Optical Programmable Time Delays and Buffers
Controllable time delays are essential components for time-domain switching. Buffers
are memory elements used to temporarily store data or to compensate for differences
in data flow rates. As is understood from Figs. 24.3-35 and 24.3-36, such delays may
be introduced by making use of optical fibers of appropriate length (silica-glass fibers
introduce delays of approximately 5 ns/m). Programmable delays may be implemented
by allowing the optical pulses to circulate in a fiber loop for a programmable number
of cycles. As illustrated in Fig. 24.3-37, this may be accomplished by using a crossbar
switch that permits the pulse to enter the loop at the desired time and releases it after a
specified number of cycles.

Delay T Delay T Delay T Delay T
( = G ——) Se ee or,
abet “TT i ро
1 t+T t+2T t+mT

Figure 24.3-37 Programmable delay line using a fiber loop and a crossbar switch. At time $ = 0,
the switch is in the cross state so that the optical pulse is admitted into the loop. At time $ = T, the
pulse returns back to the input port of the switch, which is then placed in the bar state so that the
pulse undergoes another round trip that incurs an additional delay T. At time t = mT, the pulse is
released by reconfiguring the switch to the cross state.
F. Packet Switches
The switches considered so far in this section are relational switches that establish
mappings between input and output ports that depend on the state of the switch, which
is controlled by external control signals that are not dependent on the data entering the
input ports. This type of switching is called circuit switching.

Another type of switch, called a packet switch, sets the switch configuration in
accordance with destination information contained in the input data itself. As illus-
trated in Fig. 24.3-38, the data are organized in packets, each with a header containing
the address of the packet’s destination and a payload. The packet switch contains a
header recognition unit that reads the address and sends a control signal that configures
the switch appropriately.

3 1
eS EEE
Switch

Header Payload
— Е О ОО

Е Рак t м

Header recognition
Figure 24.3-38 Packets and packet switches.

A header-address recognition system may use a bank of correlators that correlate
the bit sequence representing the address of the incoming packet with the bit se-
quences representing each of the possible addresses in a lookup table, and identifies
the address with the highest correlation. For example, if the address of the incoming

1210 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
packet is the bit sequence (а1, а2,..., ам) and that of one of the addresses in the
table is (b1, b2,..., by), the correlation is the sum ab; + agbp +--- + амбм. Since
the bits of the incoming header arrive sequentially in time, implementation of the
correlation operation requires the use of delays, multipliers, and an adder. One optical
implementation uses an optical fiber with N fiber Bragg grating (FBG) reflectors
placed at equal distances, as shown in Fig. 24.3-39. The reflectors have reflectances
(b,, b,..., by) and serve as the multipliers. The round-trip delays introduced by the
fiber segments bring the bits of the incoming header into synchrony so that they add
up to yield the correlation sum.
an FBG FBG FBG FBG
Figure 24.3-39 Optical correlator for recognizing the header address.

A packet switch may also be implemented sequentially by using a set of elementary
2х 2 switches, each of which routes the incoming packet to its upper or lower output
port depending on one bit in the header address. For example, if the bit is 1 or 0, the
switch routes the data to the upper or lower output port, respectively. In other systems,
the 2 x 2 switch sorts its two incoming packets and directs the packet with the greater
address number to the lower output port and the other packet to the upper output port.

An example is provided by the 8 x 8 three-stage switching configuration illustrated
in Fig. 24.3-40. This device, called a Banyan switch, employs twelve 2 x 2 self-routing
switches. The address of each packet is expressed as a binary number (21, 12, 23).
Routing in the first stage is based on the most significant bit x;, while routing in stages
2 and 3 is based on bits x2 and хз, respectively. In each case, if the bit is 1, the packet is
routed to the lower output port; otherwise, it goes to the upper output port. The switch
is configured in such a way that after three stages, the packet arrives at its desired
destination. However, it is not difficult to show that a conflict may arise when two
packets are to be routed to the same output port of a 2 x 2 switch. More complex
configurations, such as systems that make use of combinations of sorting and routing
units, have been devised to avoid such internal blocking.

Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3
0 0 = (000)
©. „==77 =—^
6 = (110) >< | -
.2_.- ‘ 2 = (010)
2 Xx 3= (010)
7 7=(110)
ОКИ
Figure 24.3-40 Configuration of an 8 x 8 three-stage Banyan switch. An incoming packet at input
port number 2 with header address number 6 is directed to its destination, output port number 6, after
passage through three 2 x 2 self-routing switches. Since the address is represented by the binary
number 6 = (110), the packet is directed to the (lower, lower, upper) output ports of these switches,
respectively, following the path indicated by the dashed lines, and ultimately reaches output port 6 =
(110).

24.4 PHOTONICLOGICGATES 1211

Contention occurs when packets from different input ports are simultaneously des-
tined to the same output port. Methods for contention resolution include routing the
conflicting packet via a different path or delaying it to a later time by using a buffer.
In the optical domain, the packet may also be converted to a different wavelength and
transmitted along a different wavelength channel. Wavelength converters and optical
buffers were described in Secs. 24.3D and 24.3E, respectively.

24.4 PHOTONIC LOGIC GATES
Highly sophisticated digital electronic systems, such as digital computers, contain large
numbers of interconnected basic units: switches, logic gates, and memory elements.
As illustrated in Fig. 24.4-1, all-optical logic gates may be implemented by making
use of the all-optical switches described in Sec. 24.3C. For example, the AND logic
operation may be implemented by making use of a 1 x 1 switch in which the input and
control signals (A and B, respectively) represent the two input bits of the gate, while the
output signal (C) represents the output bit [Fig. 24.4-1(a)]. The AND gate may also be
implemented by using two 1 x 1 switches connected in series, with the control signals
for the two switches serving as the input bits of the gate [Fig. 24.4-1(b)]. Similarly, two
1 x 1 switches connected in parallel implement the OR gate [Fig. 24.4-1(c)], while a
cascade of a1 x 2 switch and a2 x 1 switch implements the XOR (exclusive OR) gate
[Fig. 24.4-1(d)].
$ [+
SP Se ПР
B

(a) AND (b) AND (c) OR (d) XOR
Figure 24.4-1 Implementation of various logic gates using switches. The input bits are denoted A
and B and the output bit is denoted C. The source bit, denoted S, is in the “1” state.

While digital systems operate using binary (ON-OFF) signals (bits), the nonlinear
optical interactions underlying the operation of all-optical switches do not necessarily
adhere to this format. Binary signaling enables fan-out, input—output isolation, and the
cascadability of logic operations. What is required, in essence, is an “optical transistor.”
In this section, we introduce the basic operating principles of bistable (flip-flop) optical
systems and devices that find use in certain digital optical systems.

A. Bistable Systems

A bistable system is a two-state system whose output can assume only one of two
distinct stable values, whatever input is applied. Switching between these two values
may be achieved by changing the input level in particular ways. In the system illus-
trated in Fig. 24.4-2, for example, the output is seen to assume its low value for small
input levels and its high value for large input levels. An input signal that starts at a low
level and increases causes the output to suddenly jump from its low to its high value
when the input exceeds a certain critical level, the threshold 92. If this large input
signal is subsequently decreased, the output will jump back to its low value when the
input crosses a different threshold 91 (< 95), so that the input-output relation forms а
hysteresis loop.

1212 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
Е.
>
о
Figure 24.4-2 Input—output hysteresis relation
for a bistable system.
91 92 Input

There is an intermediate range of input levels, between 91 and 95, for which either
low or high output values are possible, depending on the history of the input. Within
this range, the system acts like a seesaw (Fig. 24.4-3). If the output is low, a large
positive input spike will flip it to high. When in the high state, a large negative input
spike will flip it to low. The system exhibits a flip-flop behavior; its state depends upon
whether the last spike was positive or negative, i.e., on its history. Bistable devices can
serve as switches, logic gates, and memory elements.

_ 2
Е. 8
1 Input 1 23 t
2
t
Figure 24.4-3 The flip-flop behavior of a bistable system. At time | the output is low. A positive
input pulse at time 2 flips the output from low to high. The output remains at its high value until a
negative pulse at time 3 flips it back to its low value. The system acts as a latching switch or a memory
element.

The bistable device parameters may be adjusted so that the two critical values (the
thresholds 91 and 95) coalesce into a single value 9. The result is then а single-
threshold steep /-shaped nonlinear input-output relation, as shown in Fig. 24.4-4.

Е Output 6
9 Input 9 | Input t
3 ¢ Е.
(a) ry (6) 1 .
Figure 24.4-4 The bistable device as: (a) An amplifier; (b) A thresholding device, pulse shaper,
or limiter.
When biased appropriately, the device can exhibit large differential gain and can be
used as an amplifier [Fig. 24.4-4(a)], much like a transistor. It can also be used as a

24.4 PHOTONICLOGICGATES 1213
thresholding element for which the output switches between two values as the input
exceeds a threshold; or it can be used as a pulse shaper or limiter [Fig. 24.4-4(b)].
Stable threshold and stable bias are required to carry out these operations.

Bistable devices may also be used as logic elements. The binary data are represented
by pulses that are added and their sum is used as the input. With an appropriate choice
of pulse heights in relation to the threshold (Fig. 24.4-5), the device can be made to
switch to its high value only when both pulses are present, for example, in which case
it behaves as an AND gate.

Output Output
Io 00010
| Figure 24.4-5 The bistable device as
| Poi | р an AND logic gate. The input J; is Г: + In,
: | ЗН ОИ МИ where J, and [5 are pulses representing the
el ‘ binary data. The output J, is high if and
0+0 ; wT only if both inputs are present.
0+1
я a AND
1+0
В. Principles of Optical Bistability
Two features are required for the operation of a bistable device: nonlinearity and
feedback. An electronic bistable (flip-flop) circuit is made by connecting the output
of each of two transistors to the input of the other, as may be understood by consulting
a textbook on digital electronics. An optical bistable system is realized by making use
of a nonlinear optical element whose output beam is used in a feedback configuration
to control the transmission of light through the element itself.

Consider the generic optical system illustrated in Fig. 24.4-6. The output intensity
(or power) Го is made to control the transmittance J of the system by means of feed-
back, so that J is some nonlinear function J = J(J,). Since Го = TI;, we have

fi lo I,= fo (24.4-1)
— T(lo) a T (Ip) . ~

Input-Output Relation
for a Bistable System
Figure 24.4-6 An optical system whose
transmittance J is a function of its output J.

If (Го) is a nonmonotonic function of Го, such as the bell-shaped function used
for purposes of illustration in Fig. 24.4-7(a), then I; = I,/T(I,) will also be а non-
monotonic function of J,, as shown in Fig. 24.4-7(b). Consequently, Го must be a
multivalued function of J;, indicating that some values of J; will have more than one
corresponding value of J,, as portrayed in Fig. 24.4-7(c). The system therefore exhibits
bistable behavior, as schematized earlier in Fig. 24.4-2.

1214 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

т 2 Tj A Io .

т. 1 3 1 [bol И } | | :

I 1, ° I Ь ° 9 9 Ij
(а) (Б) (с)

Figure 24.4-7 (a) Transmittance Т( Го) versus output J,. This nonmonotonic function is chosen for
illustrative purposes. (b) Input I; = I,/T(I.) versus output о. For I, < I, and I, > Ig, TI.) = 9
and Г; = I,/J,1, which is a linear relation of slope 1/J,. At the particular intermediate value of J,
where J has its maximum value J> (point 2), Г; dips below the line Г; = I, /T, and touches the lower
line Г; = I,/T2. (c) Output Г, versus input J;. This curve is obtained by replotting the curve in (5)
with the axes exchanged. This is achieved by rotating the diagram in (b) by 90° in a counterclockwise
direction and forming a mirror image about the vertical axis.

The plot of J, vs. Г, displayed in Fig. 24.4-7(c) is shown in more detail in Fig. 24.4-
8. For small inputs (2; < 91) or large inputs (J; > 92), each input level has only
a single corresponding output value J,. Increasing the input level from a small value
results in the output jumping to its high value when the threshold reaches 95. When
the input is subsequently decreased, the output follows its upper branch until it reaches
91, at which point it jumps to its low value.

15
Figure 24.4-8 Expanded view of Fig. 24.4-7(c).
1 The dotted curve that contains point P represents an
unstable state, as explained in the text.
91 92 Tj

In the intermediate range 91 < I; < 92, however, each input level corresponds to
three possible output values. The upper and lower values are stable, but the intermedi-
ate output value (shown as the dotted curve) is unstable since any slight perturbation
added to the input will force the output to move to either the upper or the lower branch.
This may be understood by considering point P on the dotted curve joining points 1
and 2. A small increase in the output J, will cause a sharp increase in the transmittance
(ТГ) since the slope of T(J.) is positive and large, as is evident from Fig. 24.4-
7(a). This increase in transmittance results in a further increase in Г, which serves
to increase J(J,) yet further. The net result is a transition to the upper stable state at
point 2. Similarly, a small decrease in J, at point P will cause a transition to the lower
stable state at point 1.

The nonlinear bell-shaped function J(J,) displayed in Fig. 24.4-7(a) was con-
structed for purposes of illustration. Many other nonlinear transmittance functions,
coupled with systems patterned on Fig. 24.4-6, lead to bistability, and sometimes to
multistability (where more than two stable values of the output exist for a single value
of the input).

244 PHOTONICLOGIC GATES 1215
ee
EXERCISE 24.4-1
Nonlinear Transmittance Functions That Exhibit Bistability. Plot the relation between Го
and I; = I,/T(I,) for each of the following functions:

(a) T(x) =1/[(a@ — 1)? + a?].

(b) T(x) = 1/[1 + а? sin? (a + 8)].

(©) T(x) = 44+ 1 cos(x +0).

(d) T(x) = sine? Va? + 22.

(е) T(x) = (2+ 1)?/(@ +a)”.

Select appropriate values for the constants a and @ to generate a bistable relation. Some of these
functions represent bistable systems that will be discussed subsequently.
ee
Embedded bistable systems. The foregoing analysis dealt with a system whose
transfer function J(I,) is a function of its own output. In practice, however, a nonlinear
element embedded within an optical system is illuminated not only by a portion of the
output but also by a portion of the input, as depicted in Fig. 24.4-9. In this configura-
tion, the open-loop system is described by a transfer function J (I) that depends on the
light intensity J illuminating the nonlinear element, which is the sum of a component
proportional to J; and another component proportional to Г, namely J = J; J; + Хо.
The transfer function (Г) relates the transmitted intensity to the input intensity via
I, = (ГГ. The output intensity of the closed-loop system is J, = J,J;, where J, is
a transmittance factor. Combining these relations leads to the following two equations:
I To

I; УЕ and I, R, (Г- Т.Г. (24.4-2)
The first equation is a nonlinear relation analogous to (24.4-1). It can be similarly
inverted to obtain Г as a function of Г; and exhibits bistability if (Г) is a nonmonotonic
function. The second equation is a linear relation that gives the final output J, in terms
of J and J;.

The details of the function T(J), along with the constants J;, То, and Хо, are deter-
mined by the embedded bistable system under study, as will be understood from the
devices considered in Sec. 24.4C.

у д“
Figure 24.4-9 An optical system with an em-
[ То, bedded nonlinear element NL and а feedback loop
ай У Io that directs a portion of the output power to NL. A
portion of the input power also illuminates NL.
Intrinsic bistable systems. The feedback required for bistability can also be pro-
vided entirely internally. The system shown in Fig. 24.4-10, for example, consists
of a resonator containing an optical nonlinear medium whose transmittance T(J) is
controlled solely by the internal light intensity Г within the resonator, rather than by
the output light intensity Г. Since J, = Т.Г, where J, is the transmittance of the
resonator output mirror, the action of the internal intensity J is the same as that of the
external intensity Го, except for a constant factor. Examples of intrinsic bistable optical
systems are provided in Sec. 24.4С.

1216 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
T
р I Figure 24.4-10 Intrinsic bistable device. The inter-
1 о . . . . .
nal light intensity J controls the nonlinear medium and
therefore the overall transmittance of the system T(J).
C. Bistable Optical Devices
Many schemes are available for implementing the foregoing bistability principles in
optical configurations. The principal types of nonlinear optical elements that can serve
in this capacity include:
= Dispersive nonlinear elements, for which the refractive index n is a function of
the optical intensity. A medium exhibiting the optical Kerr effect, for example,
has a refractive index n(J) = no + п2Г, where J is the intensity and по and п2
are constants, as discussed in Sec. 22.3A.
= Dissipative nonlinear elements, for which the absorption coefficient a is a func-
tion of the optical intensity. The saturable absorber discussed in Sec. 15.4A is an
example in which the absorption coefficient a(I) = ao/(1+I/I,) is a nonlinear
function of J, where ap is the small-signal absorption coefficient and Г. is the
saturation intensity.
= Amplifying nonlinear elements, in which the gain coefficient y is a function
of the optical intensity. An example is a medium with saturable gain y(J) =
Уо/(1 + I/I,), as considered in Sec. 15.4A.
= Nonlinear elements with combined dispersion and dissipation/gain. Intensity-
dependent attenuation or amplification is often combined with an intensity-
dependent refractive index. In a semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA), for
example, increasing the optical intensity depletes the carrier density, which
reduces the gain coefficient and also alters the refractive index.
Examples of optical configurations that include a nonlinear element and feedback
include the following:
Optical Kerr Medium in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. As discussed in
Sec. 2.5A, the transmittance of a Mach—Zehnder interferometer (М7. is a function
of the phase difference y between its branches: J = р + 5 COS ф. If an optical Kerr
medium of refractive index n(I) = no + neal is placed in one branch, as illustrated
in Fig. 24.4-11, then ф = Кодт + Yo = Коап2Г + фл, where 4 is the length of the
nonlinear medium; k, = 27/2, where Ло is the free-space wavelength; and yp and фт
are constants. The transmittance of the system then depends on intensity as
(Г) = $+ 1 соз (k,dnol + y1). (24.4-3)
As Fig. 24.4-11 illustrates, this function is a periodic repetition of a bell-shaped func-
tion of intensity, such as that used earlier to demonstrate bistability [Fig. 24.4-7(a)].
TH
И и
rz ИУ
Tj \
of № !
nod
Figure 24.4-11 A Mach-Zehnder interferometer in which one branch contains a nonlinear
medium of refractive index п(Г) controlled by the reflected intensity Г via the optical Kerr effect.

244 PHOTONICLOGIC GATES 1217
Optical Kerr medium in a Fabry-Perot resonator. The transmittance of a Fabry—
Perot resonator is expressible as Т = Tynax{1 + (2F/7)? эт? (ф/2)] 1, where ф is the
round-trip phase shift and “шах and F are constants [see (2.5-18)]. For an optical Kerr
medium of length d placed between the mirrors [Fig. 24.4-12(a)], we again have y =
kodn + фо = kodn2I + ф1, where yo and 1 are constants. The transmittance of the
system then depends on the internal intensity J as
О = —————__2m™ (24.4-4)
1+ (2F/m)? за? (Кот Г v1)
As illustrated in Fig. 24.4-12(6), this function consists of a periodic sequence of sharply
peaked, bell-shaped functions, and the system is bistable.
Cleaved Cleaved
q TD face face
— — —
Г Io
— |W | , Semiconductor
le Ао T material
2n2d
(a) (Б) (с)
Figure 24.4-12 (a) A Fabry-Perot resonator containing a medium of nonlinear refractive index
п(Г) that is controlled by the internal light intensity Г. (b) Intensity-dependent transmittance T(J).
(с) Bistable Fabry-Perot etalon made of a thin layer of semiconductor material with parallel reflecting
surfaces.

This configuration has been used to demonstrate optical bistability in a number of
materials (e.g., sodium vapor, carbon disulfide, and nitrobenzene). Since the nonlinear
refractive index n is small for these materials, however, the effect is hard to observe.
Semiconductors such as GaAs are more suitable since they exhibit far stronger optical
nonlinearities; in fact, a bistable device may be fabricated from a thin layer of semicon-
ductor material whose cleaved faces serve as mirrors, as portrayed in Fig. 24.4-12(c).
Multiquantum-well semiconductor structures (Secs. 17.1G and 18.2D) also exhibit
bistability, as do organic materials, graphene, nonlinear photonic crystals, and surface
plasmon polaritons.

Saturable absorber in a Fabry-Perot resonator. A saturable absorber placed in-
side a Fabry—Perot resonator of length d that is tuned for peak transmission (Fig. 24.4-
13) has transmittance т
1
J = ———, 24.4-5

(Же аа}, C449)
where Х = /R1 Ro; Ry and Ry are the mirror reflectances; and J; is a constant (see
Secs. 2.5B and 11.1A).
Г 1 Io Figure 24.4-13 A bistable device consisting of

a saturable absorber in a Fabry—Perot resonator.

If the medium is optically thin so that ad < 1, a Taylor-series expansion provides
е 99 = 1 — ad, whereupon

1218 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES
an
Tx se 24.4-6
[1 — (1 — аа) Хр? ( )

Because qa 1$ a nonlinear function of Г, 9 is also a nonlinear function of Г. Using the
relations Г = I,/T, and а(Г) = ag/(1+JI/I,), together with (24.4-6), we arrive at

T(Ip) =T. Penal (24.4-7)

+ A+ ala}
where Jz = J, /(1 — R)?, a = agdR/(1 — R), and I; = I,J. For certain values of
a, the system is bistable [see example (e) in Exercise 24.4-1].
Nonlinear amplifier in a Fabry-Perot resonator. Suppose now that the saturable
absorber considered above is replaced by an amplifying medium with saturable gain.
The system is then nothing but an optical amplifier with feedback, i.e., a laser. If
Rexp(yod) < 1, the laser is below threshold. But if Rexp(yod) > 1, the system
becomes unstable and laser oscillation ensues. Though the topic of laser bistability
was not discussed in Chapters 16 and 18, lasers do indeed exhibit bistable behavior
under certain circumstances. In some sense, the dispersive bistable optical system is
the nonlinear-refractive-index analog of the nonlinear-gain laser.
SOA-MZI bistable device. A bistable system that makes use of a pair of identical
semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA 1 and SOA 2) in a Mach—Zehnder interfero-
meter (MZIJ) configuration is illustrated in Fig. 24.4-14. The SOAs are placed in the
two branches of the МТ and the output of the MZI is fed back to SOA 1 via a feedback
loop implemented by optical fibers and couplers. The saturated gain of the SOA is a
decreasing function of the optical power and the phase is also power-dependent, so
gain and dispersive effects both come into play.
=) Tset
a |
ЗОАТ ov —- of |.
р » Treset t
Treset

Figure 24.4-14 A bistable device that makes use of two semiconductor optical amplifiers, SOA 1
and SOA 2, in the two branches of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI). The output of the MZI is
fed back into SOA 1. The “set” and “reset” short pulses initiate transitions to states of high and low
output power I, respectively. The input J; has constant power and serves as a bias.

With light of constant power J; presented to the input, the МИЛ is balanced and the
optical power J; at its output is zero, as is the output J, of the overall system. This
stable condition is the lower state of the bistable system. Another stable state is that
for which the optical power in SOA 1 is high so that its gain is depleted and its phase
differs from that of SOA 2. The MZI is then unbalanced and the output J, is high.

Flipping between the two states of this system is accomplished by making use
of external triggers. When the system is in the low state, it may be switched to the

244 PHOTONICLOGICGATES 1219

high state by injecting a short pulse Г. into SOA 1 through the feedback loop. This
reduces the gain of SOA 1 and alters the phase shift introduced by this laser. As a
consequence, the MZI becomes unbalanced and its transmittance increases. A portion
of the input optical power J; now reaches the feedback loop and is coupled back into
SOA 1, keeping it in the depleted state even after the termination of the set pulse. An
unbalanced MZI and a stable state of high output power results. The system may be
flipped back to its lower state by injecting a pulse Ге, directly into SOA 2, thereby
reducing its gain. Power also reaches SOA 1 via the feedback loop. A new balanced
МИ condition is attained for which the output power J, = 0, and the system remains
in the low state.
Coupled microring-laser bistable device. A microring laser (Sec. 18.5B) has two
independent (uncoupled) lasing modes, one that propagates clockwise (CW) and the
other that propagates counterclockwise (CCW). Two such lasers with close resonant
frequencies may be connected via a waveguide such that light from the CW mode
of laser A is coupled to the CW mode of laser B, or light from the CCW mode of
laser B is coupled to the CCW of laser A (Fig. 24.4-15). This type of mutual feedback
gives rise to a bistable system with two stable “master-slave” states in which laser A
is the master and laser B is the slave, or vice-versa. The first state emerges if more
light from the CW mode of laser A is coupled into the laser B ring. As it undergoes
resonant amplification, it injection-locks the CW mode of laser B whereupon self-
oscillation in laser B is extinguished and so is its CCW mode. The CW mode then
acquires greater power since its pump energy is supporting only one mode [Fig. 24.4-
15(a)]. The second state is established when the two lasers reverse roles; the CCW
mode of laser A is then injection-locked and acquires greater power, while its CW
mode is suppressed [Fig. 24.4-15(b)].

The system is set into the first stable state (higher power in the laser BCW mode) by
injecting a “set” optical pulse that favors the CW mode of laser B [Fig. 24.4-15(a)]. The
system may then be flipped into the second stable state (higher power in the laser A
CCW mode) by injecting a “reset” optical pulse that strengthens the CCW mode of
laser A [Fig. 24.4-15(b)]. A coupled microring-laser flip-flop implemented in the form
of an InP/InGaAsP photonic integrated circuit (PIC) exhibits a switching time of 20 ps
and a switching energy of 5.5 fJ."

Set — Reset
cw CCW
“OO OO

Laser A Laser B Laser A Laser B

Lasing Injection-locked Injection-locked Lasing
Figure 24.4-15 A bistable device using two microring lasers connected via a waveguide. The
clockwise (CW) modes of the two lasers are coupled, and so too are the counter-clockwise (CCW)
modes. (a) The “set” optical pulse initiates a state for which laser A acts as a master that injection-
locks laser B and suppresses its CCW mode. (b) The “reset” optical pulse initiates a state for which
laser B is a master that injection-locks laser A and suppresses its CW mode.

* See М. T. Hill, H. J. $. Dorren, T. de Vries, X. J. М. Leijtens, J. H. den Besten, В. Smalbrugge, Y.-S. Oei,
H. Binsma, G.-D. Khoe, and M. K. Smit, A Fast Low-Power Optical Memory Based on Coupled Micro-Ring
Lasers, Nature, vol. 432, pp. 206-209, 2004.

1220 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

Hybrid Bistable Optical Devices

All of the bistable optical systems discussed thus far are all-optical systems. Hybrid
electrical/optical bistable systems that involve electric fields have also been devised. In
one example, a Pockels cell is placed inside a Fabry—Perot resonator; the output light
is detected using a photodetector, and a voltage proportional to the detected optical
intensity is applied to the cell so that its refractive index varies in proportion to the
output intensity. The optical transmittance of the resonator is consequently a nonlinear
function of the output optical intensity, and since feedback is provided by the resonator,
the prerequisites for bistable behavior are present. A related example makes use of a
Pockels-cell wave retarder placed between crossed polarizers. Again the output light
intensity is detected and a proportional voltage is applied to the cell. The transmittance
of the modulator is then a nonmonotonic function of the transmitted intensity, and
the system is bistable. These systems are readily implemented in integrated-photonic
technology.

Spatial light modulators (SLMs) may be used to construct arrays of bistable ele-
ments. In an optically addressed liquid-crystal SLM (Sec. 21.3B), for example, the
reflectance of each element is a nonlinear function of the intensity of the light illu-
minating its write side. By using feedback, the write intensity is proportional to the
intensity of the beam reflected from the element itself, so that bistable behavior is
exhibited. Different points on the surface of the device can be addressed separately so
that the SLM serves as an array of bistable optical elements.

The self-electro-optic-effect device (SEED) is an electro-optic semiconductor de-
vice that exhibits bistability. The SEED consists of a p-i—n photodiode in which the
intrinsic region comprises a semiconductor multiquantum-well (MQW) heterostruc-
ture. The diode is reverse-biased and a large electric field is created in the MQW. By
virtue of the quantum-confined Stark effect (QCSE) (Sec. 21.5), the optical absorption
coefficient is a nonlinear function of the voltage across the MQW. Consequently, the
optical transmittance is a nonlinear function of that voltage. Bistable behavior is exhib-
ited in the SEED as a result of the feedback mechanism introduced by the photodiode
electrical circuit, which renders the voltage dependent on the incident optical power.
This occurs since the absorbed light creates a proportional photocurrent that flows into
the external circuit, resulting in a voltage drop. SEED devices can be fabricated in the
form of arrays that operate at moderately high speeds and at low powers.

READING LIST
Optical Interconnects
F. Chang, ed., Datacenter Connectivity Technologies: Principles and Practice, River Publishers,

2018.

T. Tekin, R. Pitwon, A. Hakansson, and N. Pleros, eds., Optical Interconnects for Data Centers,

Elsevier-Woodhead, 2017.

Special issue on optical interconnects, Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 12, 2016.
A. Siokis, K. Christodoulopoulos, and E. Varvarigos, Multipoint Architectures for On-Board Optical

Interconnects, Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 8, pp. 863-877, 2016.
N. Bamiedakis, K. A. Williams, R. V. Penty, and I. H. White, Integrated and Hybrid Photonics for

High-Performance Interconnects, in I. P. Kaminow, T. Li, and A. E. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber

Telecommunications VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.
J. Orcutt, В. Ram, and У. Stojanovicé, CMOS Photonics for High Performance Interconnects, in

I. P. Kaminow, T. Li, and A. E. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-A: Com-

ponents and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

C. Kachris, K. Bergman, and I. Tomkos, eds., Optical Interconnects for Future Data Center Networks,

Springer-Verlag, 2013.

READING LIST 1221

M. A. Taubenblatt, Optical Interconnects for High-Performance Computing, Journal of Lightwave
Technology, vol. 30, pp. 448-458, 2012.

С. Kachris and I. Tomkos, A Survey on Optical Interconnects for Data Centers, IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 14, pp. 1021-1036, 2012.

М. J. R. Heck, H.-W. Chen, А. W. Fang, В.К. Koch, О. Liang, H. Park, М. М. Sysak, and J. Е. Bowers,
Hybrid Silicon Photonics for Optical Interconnects, JEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics, vol. 17, pp. 333-346, 2011.

D. A. B. Miller, Device Requirements for Optical Interconnects to Silicon Chips, Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 97, pp. 1166-1185, 2009.

M. Haurylau, G. Chen, H. Chen, J. Zhang, N. A. Nelson, D. H. Albonesi, E. G. Friedman, and
P. M. Fauchet, On-Chip Optical Interconnect Roadmap: Challenges and Critical Directions, JEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 12, pp. 1699-1705, 2006.

L. Pavesi and G. Guillot, eds., Optical Interconnects: The Silicon Approach, Springer-Verlag, 2006.

S. Kawai, ed., Handbook of Optical Interconnects, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2005.

G. A. Keeler, B. E. Nelson, D. Agarwal, C. Debaes, N. C. Helman, A. Bhatnagar, and D. A. B. Miller,
The Benefits of Ultrashort Optical Pulses in Optically Interconnected Systems, JEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 9, pp. 477-485, 2003.

О. A. В. Miller, Rationale and Challenges for Optical Interconnects to Electronic Chips, Proceedings
of the IEEE, vol. 88, pp. 728—749, 2000.

$. H. Lee, ed., Selected Papers on Optical Interconnects and Packaging, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 142), 1998.

J. W. Goodman, F. I. Leonberger, S. Y. Kung, and R. A. Athale, Optical Interconnections for VLSI
Systems, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 72, pp. 850-866, 1984.

Photonic Routers, Switches, and Gates

See also the reading lists in Chapters 9, 10, 20, 21, and 22.

Е. Testa and L. Pavesi, eds., Optical Switching in Next Generation Data Centers, Springer-Verlag,
2018.

7. Chai, X. Hu, Е. Wang, X. Niu, J. Xie, and О. Gong, Ultrafast All-Optical Switching, Advanced
Optical Materials, vol. 5, 1600665, 2017.

H. Venghaus and N. Grote, eds., Fibre Optic Communication: Key Devices, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed.
2017.

Р. К. Prucnal and В. J. Shastri, Neuromorphic Photonics, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2017.

E. Cohen, S. Dolev, and M. Rosenblit, All-Optical Design for Inherently Energy-Conserving Re-
versible Gates and Circuits, Nature Communications 7, 11424 doi: 10.1038/ncomms 11424, 2016.

P. J. Winzer, C. J. Chang-Hasnain, A. E. Willner, R. C. Alferness, R. W. Tkach, and T. G. Giallorenzi,
eds., A Third of a Century of Lightwave Technology: January 1983—April 2016, ТЕЕЕ-ОЗА, 2016.

$. Wabnitz and В. J. Eggleton, eds., All-Optical Signal Processing: Data Communication and Storage
Applications, Springer-Verlag, 2015.

M. D. Feuer and S. L. Woodward, ROADMs: Reconfigurable Optics for Agile Networks, Optics &
Photonics News, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 36-43, 2015.

K. Bergman, L. P. Carloni, A. Biberman, J. Chan, and G. Hendry, Photonic Network-on-Chip Design,
Springer-Verlag, 2014.

Г. Thylen, Р. Holmstrém, L. Wosinski, В. Jaskorzynska, М. Naruse, T. Kawazoe, М. Ohtsu, М. Yan,
M. Fiorentino, and U. Westergren, Nanophotonics for Low-Power Switches, in I. P. Kaminow,
T. Li, and A. E. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-A: Components and Subsys-
tems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

S. L. Woodward, M. D. Feuer, and P. Palacharla, ROADM-Node Architectures for Reconfigurable
Photonic Networks, in I. Р. Kaminow, Т. Li, and A. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommuni-
cations VI-B: Systems and Networks, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

S. L. Woodward and M. D. Feuer, Benefits and Requirements of Flexible-Grid ROADMs and Net-
works, Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 5, рр. A19—A27, 2013.

Г. К. Oxenlowe, A. Clausen, М. Galili, H. C. H. Mulvad, H. Л, Н. Hu, and Е. Palushani, Ultra-
High-Speed Optical Time Division Multiplexing, in I. Р. Kaminow, T. Li, and А. Е. Willner, eds.,
Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier,
6th ed. 2013.

1222 CHAPTER 24 OPTICAL INTERCONNECTS AND SWITCHES

S. Frisken, I. Clarke, and S. Poole, Technology and Applications of Liquid Crystal on Silicon (LCoS)
in Telecommunications, in I. P. Kaminow, Т. Li, and А. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecom-
munications VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

K. Ishii, S. Mitsui, H. Hasegawa, K. Sato, S. Kamei, M. Okuno, and H. Takahashi, Development
of Hierarchical Optical Path Cross-Connect Systems Employing Wavelength/Waveband Selective
Switches, Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 3, pp. 559-567, 2011.

В. Li and $. J. Chua, eds., Optical Switches: Materials and Design, Elsevier-Woodhead, 2010.

T. S. El-Bawab, Optical Switching, Springer-Verlag, 2006.

I. Glesk, B. C. Wang, L. Xu, V. Baby, and P. R. Prucnal, Ultra-Fast All-Optical Switching in Optical
Networks, in Progress in Optics, vol. 45, pp. 53-117, E. Wolf, ed., Elsevier, 2003.

A. Marrakchi, ed., Selected Papers on Photonic Switching, SPIE Optical Engineering Press (Mile-
stone Series Volume 121), 1996.

C. S. Tsai, Integrated Acoustooptic and Magnetooptic Devices for Optical Information Processing,
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 84, рр. 853-869, 1996.

J. E. Midwinter, ed., Photonics in Switching, Volume 1, Background and Components, Academic
Press/Elsevier, 1993.

J. E. Midwinter, ed., Photonics in Switching, Volume 2, Systems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 1993.

Bistable Optical Devices

A. Joshi and M. Xiao, Controlling Steady-State and Dynamical Properties of Atomic Optical Bi-
stability, World Scientific, 2012.

Г. М. Binh and О. Van Liet, eds., Nonlinear Optical Systems: Principles, Phenomena, and Advanced
Signal Processing, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2012.

H. Kawaguchi, Bistabilities and Nonlinearities in Laser Diodes, Artech, 1994.

D. A. B. Miller, D. S. Chemla, T. C. Damen, T. H. Wood, C. A. Burrus, Jr., A. C. Gossard, and
W. Wiegmann, The Quantum Well Self-Electrooptic Effect Device: Optoelectronic Bistability
and Oscillation, and Self-Linearized Modulation, JEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. 21,
pp. 1462-1476, 1985.

H. M. Gibbs, Optical Bistability: Controlling Light with Light, Academic Press, 1985.

Г. А. Lugiato, Theory of Optical Bistability, in Progress in Optics, vol. 21, рр. 69-216, Е. Wolf, ed.,
North-Holland, 1984.

PROBLEMS

24.1-3 Interconnection Hologram for a Conformal Map. Design a hologram to realize the geo-

metric transformation defined by

vw = 4. (т, у) =In V2? + у?

У =, (ту) = аи" -
This is a Cartesian-to-polar transformation followed by a logarithmic transformation of the
polar coordinate r = \/x? + y?. Determine an expression for the required phase function
(a, у) of the hologram.

24.2-1 Cascaded MZI MUX/DMUX. Three Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZIs) are cascaded
as shown in Fig. 24.2-6 to multiplex or demultiplex four wavelength channels with wave-
length separation АЛ = 0.2 nm and central wavelength 1550 nm. Determine the pathlength
differences Ad required for each interferometer if the refractive index 1$ п = 2.3.

24.2-2 AWG ОМОХ. An arrayed waveguides (AWG) router (Fig. 24.2-8) is used to demultiplex
four wavelength channels with wavelength separation АЛ = 0.2 nm and central wavelength
1550 nm. Determine the pathlength difference parameter Ad; that must be introduced by
the star coupler if its refractive index is n = 2.3.

PROBLEMS 1223

24.2-3 AWG as a2x2 Wavelength Router. An AWG device is configured as a 2 x 2 wavelength
router. Input port 1 has two wavelength channels, Л! and Ag, and input port 2 has two wave-
length channels, Аз and Ла. Design a router that transposes the input wavelengths among
the two output ports, i.e., directs the A; and Аз channels to output port 1, and the Az and A4
channels to output port 2. Write the routing conditions in terms of the four optical pathlength
differences Да11, Ад12, Ad2;, and Ad. of the multipath interferometers connecting each
of the input ports to each of the output ports.

24.3-1 Power Loss and Crosstalk. A 4 x 4 switch may be implemented by use of five 2 x 2
switches. If each of these switches introduces a power loss of 0.5 dB and a crosstalk of —30
dB, determine the worst-case power loss and crosstalk for the 4 x 4 switch.

24.3-2 МИ Crossbar Switch. An electro-optic Mach—Zehnder interferometer is used аз a crossbar
switch. The application of a voltage У = У, to the electro-optic material in one arm of the
interferometer introduces a phase shift of 7. If the switch is set in the bar state when У = 0,
what must the applied voltage V be to change the switch to the cross state? Determine the
crosstalk (in dB) caused by a 1% error in that applied voltage.

24.3-3 TSI Switch. As shown in Fig. 24.3-36, the time-slot interchange (TSI) switch may be
implemented by a five step process: time-to-space routing, time delays, space switching,
time delays, and space-to-time routing. Construct another implementation using the pro-
grammable delay lines shown in Fig. 24.3-37.

24.4-2 Photonic Logic Gate. Figure 24.4-5 illustrates how a nonlinear thresholding optical device
may be used to make an AND gate. Show how a similar system may be used to make NAND,
OR, and NOR gates. Is it possible to make an XOR (exclusive OR) gate? Can the same system
be used to obtain the OR of М binary inputs?

24.4-3 Bistable Interferometer. A crystal exhibiting the optical Kerr effect is placed in one of
the arms of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. The transmitted intensity J, is fed back and
illuminates the crystal. Show that the intensity transmittance of the system is [,/I; =
T(I.) = $ + 4cos(rI,/I, + y), where I, and ф are constants. Assuming that p = 0,
sketch I, versus I; and derive an expression for the maximum differential gain dI,/dJ;.

CHAPTER
CSC
25.1 FIBER-OPTIC COMPONENTS 1226

A. Optical Fibers

B. Sources for Optical Transmitters

C. Optical Amplifiers

D. Photodetectors for Optical Receivers

E. Photonic Integrated Circuits
25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1238

A. Evolution of Optical Fiber Communication Systems

B. Performance of Optical Fiber Communication Systems

С. Attenuation- and Dispersion-Limited Systems

D. Attenuation and Dispersion Compensation and Management

E. Soliton Optical Communications
25.3 MODULATION AND MULTIPLEXING 1257

A. Modulation

B. Multiplexing

С. Wavelength-Division Multiplexing

D. Space-Division Multiplexing
25.4 COHERENT OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS 1266
25.5 FIBER-OPTIC NETWORKS 1274

A. Network Topologies and Multiple Access

B. Wavelength-Division Multiplexing Networks

rie oy
‚ \ т
& |

Sir Charles Kuen Kao (1933— Ivan Paul Kaminow (1930- Philip St John Russell (born
2018) received the Nobel Prize 2013) made pioneering con- 1953) invented the photonic-
in 2009 for recognizing that tributions to photonic compo- crystal fiber; various versions
high-purity glass, such as fused nents, systems, and networks — оЁ such fibers have found use
silica, could make optical fiber that are widely used in optical in many applications, including
communications a reality. fiber communications today. optical fiber communications.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1224

CSC
Until the mid-1970s, virtually all communication systems relied on the transmission
of information over electrical cables or made use of radio-frequency or microwave
electromagnetic radiation propagating in free space. Light would seem to have been a
more natural choice for communications since, unlike electricity and radio waves, it
did not have to be discovered. However, low-loss conduits for carrying light were not
available and obstructions such as clouds, fog, and haze hindered the passage of light
through free space.

The invention of the laser in the early 1960s stirred interest in using light to com-
municate but early lasers were bulky, inefficient, and difficult to modulate. On the
brighter side, suitable photodetectors were available. The advent of optical fiber com-
munications has its roots in two critical events in the annals of photonics: the in-
vention of compact and efficient semiconductor sources such as light-emitting diodes
(LEDs) and laser diodes (LDs), and the development of low-loss optical fibers to carry
light with minimal attenuation. The technology of optical fiber communications offers
enormous transmission capacity, long link lengths between amplifiers, immunity from
electromagnetic interference, information security, and relative ease of installation.
Indeed, billions of kilometers of optical fiber have been deployed around the globe
(the circumference of the earth is a mere 40 Mm).

The ever-increasing volume of data, voice, video, and telemetry transmitted over
both short- and long-haul links is driven by the voracious human appetite for media
content, social networking, internet applications, and cloud services. Optical fiber com-
munications is the only technology that has been able to meet the vast and exponen-
tially increasing demands of broadband communications, on scales that stretch from
the individual dwelling to the globe. All-fiber local, metropolitan, regional, long-haul,
and submarine networks interconnect organizations and cities, states and countries, and
continents. It is a remarkable, and continuing, success story.

This Chapter
This chapter provides an introduction to optical fiber communication systems and fiber-
optic networks. A point-to-point communication link comprises three basic elements,
as illustrated in Fig. 25.0-1: a compact light source modulated by an electrical signal,
a low-loss/low-dispersion optical fiber, and a photodetector that converts the optical
signal back into an electrical signal. These optical components are discussed in detail
in Chapters 18, 10, and 19, respectively. Optical amplifiers have also proved useful in
many fiber systems and these devices are discussed in Chapter 15.
Transmitter ( ( Receiver
Signal - Ea Signal
Fiber Fiber
| ] Source
Figure 25.0-1 Schematic of an optical fiber communication system. An electrical signal is
converted into an optical signal (E/O) by modulating an optical source. The optical signal is
transmitted through the fiber to the receiver, where it is converted back into an electrical signal via a
photodetector and demodulator (O/E). For long links, optical amplifiers (OAs) can be used to boost
the attenuated optical signal.

To make the chapter self-contained, Sec. 25.1 provides a brief summary of the
pertinent properties of fibers, sources, amplifiers, and detectors, and also examines their
role in the context of the overall design, operation, and performance of an optical fiber

1225

1226 — СНАРТЕВ25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

communication link. Other optical accessories such as splices, connectors, couplers,
switches, and multiplexing devices are also essential for the successful operation of
fiber links and networks; the principles underlying the operation of many of these
devices are described in Chapter 24 and in other parts of this book.

Section 25.2 summarizes the evolution of optical fiber communication systems from
a historical perspective and considers the basic design principles applicable to long-
distance intensity-modulated digital and analog links. The maximum fiber span avail-
able for transmitting data, at a given rate and with a prescribed performance level, is
determined. Performance deteriorates if the data rate exceeds the fiber bandwidth, or if
the received power falls below the receiver sensitivity in which case the signal cannot
be distinguished from noise.

This is followed, in Sec. 25.3, by an introduction to the various forms of modulation
and multiplexing used in optical fiber systems, including field, intensity, and digital
modulation. Multiplexing, which enables more than one signal to be sent on a sin-
gle communication link, exists in many forms, including time-division, code-division,
wavelength-division, and space-division versions thereof.

Digital coherent fiber communication systems, which are introduced in Sec. 25.4,
use light not as a source of controllable power but rather as an electromagnetic wave
of controllable amplitude, frequency, and/or phase. Coherent optical fiber systems
are the natural extension to higher frequencies of conventional radio and microwave
communication systems. Modern high-speed electronics, spectrally efficient coding,
and digital signal processing have permitted coherent systems to provide unparalleled
performance in receiver sensitivity and information-transmission capacity.

Fiber-optic networks are communication links controlled by a set of routers and
switches that interconnect multiple users distributed over some geographic area (e.g.,
a local-area network or LAN). Section 25.5 provides an introduction to such networks,
including wavelength-division multiplexed (WDM) versions.

25.1 FIBER-OPTIC COMPONENTS
A. Optical Fibers
An optical fiber is a cylindrical dielectric waveguide made of low-loss materials, usu-
ally fused silica glass (5102) of high chemical purity. In its simplest configuration,
called a step-index fiber, the core of the waveguide has a constant refractive index
that is slightly higher than that of the cladding (the outer medium) so that light is
guided by total internal reflection along the direction of the fiber axis.

The transmission of light through the fiber may be most simply understood by exam-
ining the trajectories of the guided rays within the core (Sec. 10.1). A more complete
analysis, based on electromagnetic theory, teaches that light travels in the fiber in the
form of guided waves (Sec. 10.2); each is a mode with a distinct spatial distribution,
polarization, propagation constant, group velocity, and attenuation coefficient. There
is, however, a correspondence between each mode and a ray that bounces within the
core in a distinct trajectory.

The step-index fiber is characterized by its core radius a; the refractive indices
of its core and cladding, пл and 72, respectively; and the fractional refractive index
difference A = (n1 — п2) /пл, which is usually very small (0.001 < A < 0.02). Light
rays making angles with the fiber axis that are smaller than the complement of the
critical angle, 0. = cos~!(ng/n1), are guided within the core by multiple total internal
reflections at the core—cladding boundary. The angle 9. in the fiber corresponds to an
acceptance angle 6, = эт (NA) for rays incident from air into the fiber, where the

25.1 FIBER-OPTIC COMPONENTS 1227
numerical aperture NA is given by
NA = sin 6, = \/n? — п2 = nV2A. (25.1-1)
Numerical Aperture
Multimode Fibers (MMFs)
Step-index fibers. The number of guided modes М supported by a step-index mul-
timode fiber is governed by the fiber V parameter, У = 27(a/X,) NA, where а/Ло
is the ratio of the core radius to the free-space wavelength (Sec. 10.2A). A fiber with
V > 1 supports a large number of modes: М = V?/2. Since the modes travel with
different group velocities, this results in pulse spreading, which increases linearly with
the fiber length, an effect known as modal dispersion. When an impulse of light travels
a distance L in the fiber, it arrives as a sequence of pulses centered at the modal delay
times, as illustrated in Fig. 25.1-1(a). The composite pulse has an approximate RMS
width
я Ар, (25.1-2)
2c Response Time
(Step-Index MMF)
where с1 = со/пл. For example, ifn; = 1.46 and A = 0.01, the time-width increase
per km is approximately A/2c; = 24 ns/km; for a 100-km-long fiber, an impulse
spreads to a width of 2.4 ys. To minimize ох, it is clearly desirable to use fibers with
small values of A.
Graded-index fibers. Modal dispersion can be reduced by making use of graded-
index (GRIN) fibers [Fig. 25.1-1(b)]. These fibers are designed such that the refractive
index of the core varies gradually from a maximum value n, on the fiber axis to a min-
imum value 72 at the core—cladding boundary (Sec. 10.2C). Rays then follow curved
trajectories, with paths that are shorter than those in the step-index fiber. The axial
ray travels the shortest distance but at the smallest phase velocity (largest refractive
index), while the oblique rays travel longer distances but at higher phase velocities
(smaller refractive indices), so that the delay times are approximately equalized. If
the fiber is optimally graded (using an approximately parabolic profile), the pulse
spreading rate (ps/km) is proportional to that of the equivalent step-index fiber, with
a proportionality constant A/2. For A = 0.01, for example, the pulse spread of the
GRIN fiber is theoretically reduced by a factor of 500 relative to that of the step-index
fiber; in practice, however, the improvement is generally more moderate because of the
difficulty of achieving the ideal index profile.
Short-haul multimode fiber-optic links. Silica multimode fibers serve as efficient,
low-cost, links for short-haul communications. These systems often operate at 850 nm
and are used in local area networks (LANs), datacenters, and financial centers. Various
MMF grades at this wavelength are specified in terms of their optical mode (OM)
designators: OM1 and OM2 operate at bit rates of 1 Gb/s over distances of 300 m
and 600 m, respectively; OM3 and OM4 operate at 10 Gb/s at distances of 300 m and
550 m, respectively.

1228 — СНАРТЕА25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
MMF: Step-Index ny Impulse response
|... Aw)
(a) SS А Шо
1 6 ;
MMF: GRIN ny
0 t
SMF ng
ny |
0 t
MCF
ng
ГС — Or
@ ( © : | Ц
п 0 t
Figure 25.1-1 (a) Step-index multimode fiber (MMF): relatively large core diameter; uniform
refractive indices in core and cladding; large pulse spreading arising from modal dispersion.
(b) Graded-index multimode fiber (MMF: GRIN): graded refractive index of core; fewer modes;
reduced pulse broadening arising from modal dispersion. (c) Single-mode fiber (SMF): small
core diameter; no modal dispersion; pulse broadening arises only from material and waveguide
dispersion. (4) Multicore fiber (MCF): well-separated cores serve as independent optical single-mode
or multimode waveguides; closer cores support coupled core propagation in the form of supermodes.
Single-Mode Fibers (SMFs)
When the core radius a and the numerical aperture NA of a step-index fiber are suf-
ficiently small so that V < 2.405, only a single mode is allowed and the fiber is
called a single-mode fiber [Fig. 25.1-1(c)]. One advantage of using a SMF is the
elimination of pulse spreading caused by modal dispersion (Sec. 10.2B). Pulse spread-
ing occurs, nevertheless, since the initial pulse has a finite spectral linewidth and the
group velocities (and therefore the delay times) are wavelength dependent. This effect
is known as chromatic dispersion. There are two origins of chromatic dispersion:
material dispersion, which results from the dependence of the refractive index on the
wavelength, and waveguide dispersion, which is a consequence of the dependence of
the group velocity of the mode on the ratio between the core radius and the wavelength.
Material dispersion is usually larger than waveguide dispersion.
A short optical pulse of spectral width сх spreads to a temporal width
от =|DjoyL, (25.1-3)
Response Time (SMF)
which is proportional to the propagation distance Г, (km) and to the source linewidth
a (nm). The dispersion coefficient D (ps/km-nm) involves a combination of material
and waveguide dispersion. For weakly guiding fibers (A < 1), D may be separated
into asum D) + D, for the material and waveguide contributions, respectively.
Consider, as an example, a SMF with a light source of spectral linewidth ох =
1 nm (such as that emitted from a typical single-mode laser) and a fiber dispersion
coefficient D = 1 ps/km-nm (for a silica fiber operating near A, = 1300 nm with

254 FIBER-OPTIC COMPONENTS 1229
minimal waveguide dispersion). The response time calculated from (25.1-3) turns out
to be о, /L = 1 ps/km; for a 100-km-long fiber, an impulse spreads to a width of
100 ps, far less than that for the multimode step-index fiber considered above.

The geometries, refractive-index profiles, and pulse broadening for step-index mul-
timode, graded-index, and single-mode fibers are schematically compared in Fig. 25.1-
1. Multicore fibers (Sec. 10.2D), which have multiple cores embedded in the same
cladding, are included.

Material Attenuation and Dispersion
The wavelength dependence of the attenuation coefficient for fused silica-glass fibers is
illustrated in Fig. 25.1-2. As the wavelength increases beyond the visible band, the at-
tenuation coefficient « decreases to about 0.3 dB/km at A, = 1300 nm and, aside from
a slight bump arising from residual OH-ion absorption near 1380 nm (Sec. 10.3A), falls
to a minimum of = 0.16 dB/km at Л, = 1550 nm. The attenuation rises sharply as the
wavelength rises beyond 1700 nm.
< Frequency (THz) _240 230 220 210 200 190 180

Я

ЗЕ 1 Е ЗС ь

ot

. ”

<

40 Г]

О И

ЗЕ О Е ЗО

8 —160р = =) 4) j4 =) =

700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700
Wavelength Ло (пт) —>

Figure 25.1-2 Wavelength dependence of the attenuation coefficient « (dB/km) and the material
dispersion coefficient О» (ps/km-nm) for silica-glass fibers with suppressed OH absorption. Three
telecommunications bands are highlighted in dark shading: the band centered at 870 nm, which was
used in the earliest systems, has х = 1.5 dB/km and D, = —80 ps/km-nm; the О (original)
band centered at 1310 nm, for which « = 0.3 dB/km and the dispersion is minimal; and the С
(conventional) band centered at 1550 nm, for which the attenuation is minimal (« = 0.16 dB/km)
and D, = +17 ps/km-nm. The additional bands used in wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM)
systems include: E = Extended, S = Short, L = Long, and U = Ultra-long.

The wavelength dependence of the dispersion coefficient О» for fused silica
glass fibers is also displayed in Fig. 25.1-2. It exhibits negative values at short
wavelengths that become positive at long wavelengths, and it passes through zero
at Ло = 1312 nm (Sec. 10.3B). In a medium with a negative dispersion coefficient,
the shorter-wavelength components of a pulse travel more slowly than the longer-
wavelength components, and therefore arrive later. This condition is known as normal
dispersion. The opposite situation, called anomalous dispersion, occurs in a medium
that exhibits a positive dispersion coefficient (Sec. 5.7). Though the sign of the

1230 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
dispersion coefficient does not affect the pulse-broadening rate, it does play an
important role in pulse propagation through media comprising cascades of materials
with dispersion coefficients of different signs (Secs. 25.2D and 23.3).
Dispersion-Modified Fibers
As described in Sec. 10.3B, advanced designs of single-mode fibers make use of
graded-index cores with special refractive-index profiles. These are selected such that
the overall chromatic dispersion coefficient D attains desired values at particular wave-
lengths, or assumes a wavelength dependence that is useful in optical fiber communi-
cation systems, as in the following examples:
= In dispersion-shifted fibers (DSFs), Г) vanishes at Ло = 1550 nm, where at-
tenuation is minimum, rather than at 1312 nm [see Fig. 10.3-6(a)]. In non-zero
dispersion-shifted fibers (NZ-DSFs), Г) is significantly reduced in the 1500-
1600 nm window, but it is not zero. Indeed, a small amount of dispersion can be
useful in mitigating nonlinear distortions encountered by narrow intense pulses.
The wavelength dependence of D in DSF and NZ-DSF fibers is illustrated in
Fig. 25.1-3.
= In dispersion-flattened fibers (DFFs), D vanishes at two wavelengths and is
reduced at intermediate wavelengths [see Fig. 10.3-6(6}].
= In dispersion-compensating fibers (DCFs), D is proportional to that of the con-
ventional step-index fiber over an extended wavelength band, but has the opposite
sign. A short length of fiber with a reversed large dispersion coefficient can be
used to compensate the pulse spreading introduced in long lengths of conventional
fiber [see Fig. 10.3-6(c)].
~— Frequency (THz)
20 230 220 210 200 190 180
= _ Figure 25.1-3 Wavelength depen-
2 10 Conventional | ~~ dence of the chromatic dispersion co-
Ea Е .277 7 coss|_ b> ZA efficient Dor a conventional ner and
о 2 UJ or examples от a dispersion-shiite:
Е Е ое == SS fiber SB) anda non-2ero dispersion-
2 №05" A] shifted fiber (NZ-DSF). The desig-
аа 10 DSF nations G.653 and G.655 are spec-
a ifications of the ITU (International
O E ско Telecommunications Union).
~20 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700
Wavelength Ло (пт) —>
Other dispersion-modified fibers include holey fibers and photonic-crystal fibers
(PCFs), as considered in Sec. 10.4. In these fibers, chromatic dispersion is dominated
by waveguide dispersion, which is strongly dependent on the geometry of the holes.
Dispersion flattening over broad wavelength ranges can be achieved as can dispersion
shifting to wavelengths shorter than the zero-material-dispersion wavelength. A holey
fiber may be designed to operate as a single-mode waveguide over a broad range of
wavelengths (endlessly single-mode fibers). In fibers with a hollow core and a cladding
with holes arranged in a periodic structure, light is guided in the core by reflection from
the surrounding photonic-crystal cladding. Since the light travels in the hollow core, it
suffers lower losses and reduced nonlinear effects.
Polarization Mode Dispersion
Another form of pulse spreading, known as polarization mode dispersion (PMD), is
caused by random anisotropic changes in the fiber introduced by environmental and
structural factors along its length. Random variations in the magnitude and orientation

25.1 FIBER-OPTIC COMPONENTS 1231
of the birefringence introduce differential delays between the two polarization modes
and, as described in Sec. 10.3B, the RMS value of the pulse broadening associated with
PMD is proportional to the square root of the fiber length,

Polarization Mode Dispersion
where Dpyp is a dispersion parameter that typically ranges from 0.1 to 1 ps/Vkm.
Polarization mode dispersion becomes important at high data rates when other forms
of dispersion are compensated.

Nonlinear Optical Effects

Silica-glass fibers exhibit two kinds of optical nonlinear effects that are germane to
their use in optical fiber communication systems — third-order nonlinearity, which un-
derlies the optical Kerr effect; and nonlinear inelastic scattering, which includes stimu-
lated Raman and Brillouin scattering. When high-power optical pulses are transmitted
through single-mode fibers with small cross-sectional areas, the optical intensity may
be sufficient for these nonlinear interactions to cause deleterious effects that damage
signal integrity and limit transmission distance and speed:

= Self-phase modulation (SPM) is a form of nonlinear dispersion caused by the opti-

cal Kerr effect (a dependence of the refractive index, and hence the phase velocity,
on the optical intensity, as described in Sec. 22.3A). Pulse spreading ensues since
different segments of the optical pulse travel at different velocities (Sec. 23.3B).
The optical Kerr effect may also result in crosstalk between counterpropagating
waves in two-way communication systems.

= Cross-phase modulation (XPM) results from nonlinear wave mixing wherein the

phase velocity of a wave at one wavelength depends on the intensities of waves
at other wavelengths traveling simultaneously in the same fiber (Sec. 22.3C).
In wavelength-division-multiplexed (WDM) systems, XPM can cause substantial
crosstalk among different channels.

= Four-wave mixing (FWM) is also associated with third-order nonlinear effects

(Sec. 22.3D). It causes crosstalk between four waves of different wavelengths
traveling simultaneously in the same fiber since the waves may exchange energy.
This introduces an intensity-dependent gain/loss into the channels of a WDM
system.

= Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) and stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS) are

inelastic scattering processes that involve interactions between light and molecu-
lar or acoustic vibrations of the medium. In these processes, two optical waves
of different wavelengths interact via a molecular vibration mode (SRS) or an
acoustic vibration mode (SBS) (Secs. 14.5C, 15.3D, and 16.3C). Such interactions
also lead to undesirable crosstalk among channels ша WDM system.

The deleterious effects of nonlinear phenomena in optical fiber communications
can be mitigated by increasing the fiber core diameter, thereby reducing the energy
density. This can sometimes be achieved by making use of large-mode-area photonic-
crystal fibers (Sec. 10.4), although this sometimes requires the deployment of new
fiber. However, the nonlinear properties of fibers can also be harnessed for useful ap-
plications in communication systems. Nonlinear dispersion via SPM may be adjusted
to compensate for chromatic dispersion in the fiber, giving rise to optical solitons
(Sec. 23.5B). Nonlinear interactions can also be used to provide useful gain via FWM
or SRS. Raman and Brillouin fiber amplifiers are discussed in Secs. 15.3D and 25.1C.

1232 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
B. Sources for Optical Transmitters
The requirements for the light source used in an optical fiber communication system
depend on the nature of the intended application, e.g., long-haul communication or
short-haul local-area network.
A number of features are important in determining the source of choice:
= Wavelength. The wavelength of the source must be compatible with the fiber
medium, usually near the wavelength of its minimum loss or minimum dispersion.
= Power. The source power must be sufficiently high so that, after transmission
through the fiber and any associated amplification, the received signal is de-
tectable with the required accuracy.
= Speed. The source power must be able to be modulated at the rate desired for
imparting information.
= Linewidth. The spectral linewidth must be sufficiently narrow so that phase noise
and the effect of fiber chromatic dispersion is minimized.
= Noise. Random fluctuations in the source power and frequency are to be avoided,
particularly for coherent communication systems.
= Other features. Other important features include ruggedness, compactness, relia-
bility, low cost, long lifetime, and insensitivity to environmental variables such as
temperature.
Laser-Diode and VCSEL Sources
Quantum-confined laser diodes (LDs) and vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers
(VCSELs), discussed in Secs. 18.4 and 18.5A, respectively, are both widely used
as sources in optical fiber communication systems. Long-haul and short-haul systems,
considered in turn, principally make use of LDs and VCSELs, respectively.
Long-haul systems. Long-haul, high-bit-rate communication systems generally rely
on single-mode silica-glass fiber, billions of kilometers of which span the globe. Opera-
tion at wavelengths in the 1.3—1.6 jzm telecommunications band, the region of minimal
dispersion and attenuation (Fig. 25.1-2), is readily accommodated by making use of
laser diodes fabricated from InGaAsP, a direct-bandgap, quaternary Ш-У semicon-
ductor (Sec. 18.1C). As discussed in Sec. 18.4A, multiquantum-well lasers, and their
strained-layer counterparts, are widely used in such systems because of their supe-
rior properties. Edge-emitting distributed-feedback (DFB) laser diodes are particularly
good candidates. As illustrated in Fig. 25.1-4, these devices make use of a corrugated-
layer grating, placed adjacent to the active region, that acts as a distributed reflector
and imposes single-frequency operation.
о+
Figure 25.1-4 Buried-heterostructure
MQW РЕВ laser used for long-haul
nInP NZS optical fiber communications in the 1.3—
SZ < A p-InP 1.6-ит telecommunications band. This
cule ate ag>. м. single-frequency laser operates on a single
grating < < spatial and a single longitudinal mode. It
Ч РЯ SS Fiber generates an output power P, > 1 W with
InGaAsP 0 | 7 a spectral width Av, of a few MHz.
MQW
active region
These devices can operate on a single spatial and longitudinal mode and deliver
optical powers of watts to tens of watts, power-conversion efficiencies of 70%, mod-
ulation rates of tens of Gb/s, spectral widths of a few MHz, and life spans of years.

25.4 FIBER-OPTIC COMPONENTS 1233
The operation of these low-noise lasers is robust in the presence of external temper-
ature variations and modulation since they are immune to the deleterious effects of
frequency chirping, the change in laser frequency that results from refractive-index
variations accompanying fluctuations in the carrier concentration as the drive current
is modulated. Typical values of the threshold current and differential responsivity are
i, < 10 mA and Ка = 0.4 W/A, respectively.
Short-haul systems. Short-haul communication systems also often make use of sil-
ica fibers but rely on single-mode VCSELs that operate in the 1.3—1.6-j1m telecommu-
nications band. These devices consume little electrical power and can be modulated
at bit rates exceeding 10 Gb/s. Their low optical power can be mitigated by the use
of amplifiers. Some short-haul silica-fiber-based systems operate at 850 nm using
AlGaAs devices. Other, less expensive, plastic-fiber systems operate at 650 nm and
rely on AlInGaP devices; 1-mm-diameter, polymer-core fibers can yield data rates of
1 Gb/s. Modules that include VCSELs with WDM functionality are available for high-
bandwidth communications (Sec. 25.1E).
Other Sources
A number of sources other than LDs and VCSELs are used, or are potentially useful,
as optical transmitters.
LEDs. Whether edge-emitting or surface-emitting (Sec. 18.1), LEDs are generally
inferior to LDs and VCSELs for use in optical fiber systems. This stems from their
lower power, lower conversion efficiency, and lower modulation rate, along with their
larger spectral width and larger light-emission angle, which makes it difficult to couple
the light into an optical fiber. The principal advantage of using an LED source is low
cost. AlInGaP/InGaP resonant-cavity LEDs operating at 650 nm (Fig. 18.1-20), and
InGaAsP LEDs operating at 1.3 ит (Fig. 18.1-19), have indeed been used as sources
in short-haul, modest-bit-rate systems. By-and-large, however, LEDs have ceded their
ground to VCSELs, which have superior performance.
МОР lasers. Provided that they emit sufficiently high power, multiquantum-dot
lasers (Sec. 18.4C) have the distinct merits of small size, low power consumption,
low threshold, reduced linewidth, enhanced modulation bandwidth, and resistance to
operating-temperature variations.
Fiber РЕВ lasers. Some fiber systems, such as those that make use of WDM and co-
herent communications, respectively), require sources whose wavelength can be tuned.
Coherent communication systems with advanced modulation formats, in particular,
impose stringent requirements on source stability, linewidth, phase noise, and local-
oscillator tunability. External-cavity wavelength-tunable laser diodes (Sec. 18.3C) of-
ten serve as sources for such systems, but more robust and less expensive alternatives,
such as fiber distributed-feedback lasers, are under development.
Multimode lasers. Though they provide greater power, multimode laser diodes are
often avoided since they suffer from partition noise. When subjected to chromatic
dispersion in the fiber channel, the random distribution of laser power among the modes
leads to random intensity fluctuations and reshaping of the transmitted pulses. Multi-
mode VCSELs that operate in the 750-850-nm wavelength region are nevertheless
sometimes used for short-haul optical fiber communications.
Mid-IR QCLs. Interest in mid-infrared optical fiber communications stems from
several relatively recent developments in infrared photonics: 1) advances in the devel-
opment of fluoride and other soft-glass fibers (Sec. 10.5), which exhibit substantially
reduced Rayleigh scattering and absorption in comparison with silica glass; 2) the
operation of quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) in the mid infrared (Sec. 18.4D); and

1234 — СНАРТЕВ25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
3) the evolution of mid-infrared photodetectors that make use of materials such as
HgCdTe and VOx (Secs. 19.4 and 19.5).
C. Optical Amplifiers
Optical amplifiers are indispensable components in modern long-haul optical fiber
communication systems. They find use as power amplifiers (also called postampli-
fiers), line amplifiers, and preamplifiers. As illustrated in Fig. 25.1-5, power amplifiers
augment the optical power before light is launched into an optical fiber, line amplifiers
serve to boost the signal in the course of transmission (Fig. 25.0-1), and preamplifiers
provide gain before photodetection.
Fiber

(b) transmitter Tine > ©_ eceiver
(c) Fiber
Figure 25.1-5 Optical fiber amplifiers are used in three configurations in optical fiber communi-
cation systems: (a) power amplifiers; (6) line amplifiers; and (с) preamplifiers.

In this section, we consider in turn the three types of optical fiber amplifiers (OFAs)
that are typically used in optical fiber communication systems:

= Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) (Sec. 15.3C).

= Rare-earth-doped fiber amplifiers (REFAs) (Sec. 15.3C).

= Raman fiber amplifiers (RFAs) (Sec. 15.3D).
Though semiconductor optical amplifiers (Sec. 18.2) are compact and compatible with
photonic integrated circuits, their disadvantages outweigh their merits in the domain
of optical fiber communications. In particular, they are inferior to OFAs in terms of
fiber geometry, gain, interchannel interference, intersymbol interference, noise, and
temperature sensitivity. Similarly, optical parametric amplifiers (Sec. 22.2C) offer sub-
stantial gain and broadband tunability but are inferior to OFAs in that they require
phase matching and suffer from nonlinearities and sensitivity to polarization.
Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers (EDFAs)
Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs), which were the first OFAs to be developed,
are widely used in optical fiber communication systems. As discussed in Sec. 15.3C,
they offer high polarization-independent gain, high output power, high efficiency, low
insertion loss, low noise, and a broad transition that offers gain in the vicinity of A, =
1550 nm (corresponding to the wavelength of minimum loss for silica optical fibers,
as shown in Fig. 25.1-2). Quasi-three-level pumping is achieved by longitudinally cou-
pling light into the optical fiber, in the forward or backward direction, or bidirectionally
(Fig. 15.3-5). The pump light is usually generated by strained quantum-well InGaAs
laser diodes operating at A, = 980 nm, although in-band pumping at 1480 nm is also
used. Ytterbium is usually added to erbium as a co-dopant to increase efficiency.

254 FIBER-OPTIC COMPONENTS 1235

Gains in excess of 50 dB can be achieved in EDFAs with tens of mW of pump
power; signal output powers in excess of 100 W are readily generated. Line-amplifier
spacings are often = 50 km. The available bandwidth is АЛ = 40 nm, corresponding
to Av & 5.3 THz, which accommodates the C-band. The L-band can be accommo-
dated by modifying the optimization parameters of the EDFAs. The large gain and
bandwidth offered by these amplifiers make them ideal for use in wavelength-division
multiplexing (WDM) systems (Sec. 25.3C). The mixed homogeneous/inhomogeneous
broadening leads to a wavelength-dependent gain profile that can require gain equaliza-
tion. However, EDFAs are often operated in the saturated regime and exhibit minimal
crosstalk between different signals that are simultaneously transmitted through them.
Rare-Earth-Doped Fiber Amplifiers (REFAs)
Rare-earth-doped fiber amplifiers (REFAs) other than Er?* that are useful for optical
fiber communications include Tm** and Pr**+. Good performance can be obtained
from Tm?+-doped REFAs operating in the S- and U-bands and from Pr?+-doped RE-
FAs operating in the O-band (Fig. 25.1-2). Though neither of these REFAs offers the
kind of gain and efficiency achievable with EDFAs, mixing and matching Er?* and
Tm? fiber amplifiers can provide a channel bandwidth of АЛ = 150 nm, correspond-
ing to Av & 18.8 THz at 1550 nm.
Raman Fiber Amplifiers (RFAs)
Raman fiber amplifiers (RFAs) operate on the basis of stimulated Raman scattering
(Secs. 14.5C, 15.3D, and 16.3C). As discussed in Sec. 15.3D, there are two standard
RFA configurations: (1) distributed RFAs where the signal and pump are both sent
through a transmission fiber that serves as the gain medium; and (2) lumped RFAs in
which a short length of highly nonlinear fiber serves as the amplifier and provides gain.
As with EDFAs, pumping can be in the forward or backward direction, or bidirectional.

RFAs typically offer greater bandwidths than EDFAs. The bandwidth over which
Raman gain is available in germanium-doped silica fiber is about 100 nm (correspond-
ing to about 12.5 THz at 1550 nm). Moreover, multiple pumps at different frequencies
can be combined to provide far greater bandwidths; indeed, Raman amplification can,
in principle, be employed over the entire region of fiber transparency. The gain of a
RFA, which can reach = 20 dB, is substantially lower than that of an EDFA, as are the
efficiency and gain efficiency. However, this can be mitigated in part by making use
of dispersion-compensating fiber to simultaneously achieve gain and accommodate
the different signal- and pump-pulse frequencies. The relative merits of EDFAs and
RFAs have been detailed in Sec. 15.3D. In spite of the apparent shortcomings of RFAs
in comparison with EDFAs, their wider bandwidths, arbitrary operating wavelengths,
and compatibility with existing systems render them of interest for certain applica-
tions. They are particularly attractive for use in those telecommunications bands where
EDFAs and other REFAs are unavailable or inefficient.
D. Photodetectors for Optical Receivers
A comprehensive discussion of various photodetectors has been provided in Chap-
ter 19. The two most commonly used types of detectors employed in optical fiber com-
munication systems are p—i—n (PIN) photodiodes and avalanche photodiodes (APDs).
By virtue of their larger bandwidths, PIN photodiodes are widely used for systems
that rely on coherent communications and that make use of high-efficiency modulation
techniques. Schottky-barrier photodiodes, which can have bandwidths = 100 GHz, are
also used.

Systems that make use of direct detection enjoy a competitive advantage in sim-
plicity and cost, and are tolerant to chromatic dispersion, intersymbol interference,

1236 — CHAPTER25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

and polarization mode dispersion. Direct-detection systems often make use of APDs,
which have the advantage that they provide gain before the first electronic receiver
amplification stage, thereby reducing the detrimental effects of circuit noise. However,
the multiplication mechanism inherent in APDs introduces intrinsic gain noise and
engenders an avalanche multiplication time that can reduce receiver bandwidth. Fur-
thermore, APDs require greater voltage and more complex circuitry than PIN detectors,
and can often require temperature stabilization. Nevertheless, low-noise APDs with
enhanced gain—bandwidth products are widely used in high bit-rate telecommunication
systems. The signal-to-noise ratio and sensitivity of receivers using p—i—n photodiodes
and APDs has been considered in Sec. 19.6.

Photodetectors in the 1300—1600-nm Wavelength Range

As illustrated in Fig. 25.1-2, the attenuation and dispersion properties of silica optical
fibers favor operation in the 1.3—1.6-jzm wavelength region comprising the О, Е, 5, С,
L, and U telecommunications bands. Silicon is not photosensitive in this wavelength
range as it is transparent (A, = 1.11 ит < Ло; see Table 17.1-2).

InGaAs PIN and APD Photodetectors. The most widely used photosensitive ma-
terial in this wavelength range is Ing.53Gag,47As, lattice-matched to InP, for which the
bandgap energy E, = 0.75 eV (A, = 1.65 ит). Both PIN and SACM (separate absorp-
tion, charge, and multiplication) InGaAs/InGaAsP/InP (A/C/M) APDs are extensively
used for long-haul systems that operate in this wavelength range. Waveguide structures
offer larger bandwidths.

A typical InGaAs PIN photodiode operating at 1550 nm has quantum efficiency
7 = 0.80, responsivity R == 0.95 A/W (Fig. 19.3-9), and bandwidth В = 10 GHz.

A typical InGaAs/InGaAsP/InP SACM APD operated at a reverse bias of tens of

volts provides a mean gain G = 10 and has a bandwidth В = 10 GHz (Example 19.4-
2). Though normal-incidence InGaAs APDs achieve excellent receiver sensitivities for
bit rates as high as 10 Gb/s, three factors limit their performance at higher bit rates:
1) since а = 10* ст! for InGaAs in this wavelength range, the absorption region
must be + 2.5 jum thick to attain 7 > 90%; 2) the associated transit time then limits
the bandwidth to B ~ 10 GHz at low gain values; at higher values of the gain, where
the avalanche buildup time comes into play, the relatively low gain—bandwidth product
(GB < 100 GHz) restricts the frequency response; and 3) the ionization ratio 1/k ~
0.3 for InP results in significantly higher excess noise than that attainable with Si. On
the other hand, the gain noise of the APD can be reduced, and its speed increased,
by making use of Alop,4gIno.52As multiplication layers, which offer a reduction of the
ionization ratio 1/k = 0.2, and further by making these layers sufficiently thin so that
dead-space (history-dependent ionization) effects play a salutary role (Sec. 19.6B). The
gain—bandwidth product can then be increased to GB = 235 GHz.
Ge-on-Si PIN and APD Photodetectors. Germanium can also serve as a photo-
sensitive material for PIN and APD detectors in the 1.3—1.6-44m wavelength region.
Though the use of Ge by itself has a number of drawbacks, group-IV-photonics mono-
lithic devices that make use of Ge-on-Si have the merit that they are CMOS-compatible
and hence available for on-chip integration. Waveguide-based devices offer both high
quantum efficiency and high speed since they decouple the light absorption and carrier
collection. There are two principal limitations associated with the use of Ge-on-Si
devices, however: 1) the photosensitivity of Ge falls off rapidly for A, > 1.55 ит,
and 2) the dark current is relatively large as a result of the lattice mismatch between
Ge and Si.

The particular design for a Ge-on-Si waveguide PIN photodiode operating at
1550 nm described in Example 19.3-2 relies on the butt coupling of light from a
Si waveguide to the 7 region of a lateral p—i—n Ge-on-Si photodiode integrated at its

25.1 FIBER-OPTIC COMPONENTS 1237
end. This device offers a responsivity К = 1 А/М and a bandwidth В > 50 GHz. Its
performance is comparable to that obtained via the hybrid integration of InGaAs on Si.

In the normal-incidence Ge-on-Si SACM APD considered in Example 19.4-3, pho-
tons impinge on a Ge absorber layer grown on top of a layer of Si, where carrier mul-
tiplication takes place. To restrict the dark current, low electric field in the absorption
region is maintained by a Si charge layer. With unintentionally doped Ge and Si layers
of thicknesses 1 and № ит, respectively, and a 0.1-ит p-type Si charge layer, this
APD exhibits a mean gain G = 50, a gain—bandwidth product GB = 350 GHz (which
substantially exceeds that of an InGaAs/InP APD), a responsivity К = 5.9 A/W at
Xo = 1.3 ит, an ionization ratio К = 0.09, and operation at bit rates of 25 Gb/s.
AlinAsSb APD Photodetectors. Recent efforts for improving APD performance
have focused on the development of new structures and materials that achieve lower
noise and higher speeds, while maintaining adequate gain. An example is the AlInAsSb
SACM APD, a Ш-У direct-bandgap device that operates across the 1.3—1.6-4m
telecommunications band. A device such as that described in Example 19.4-4 has a
quantum efficiency 7 = 0.4 and a dark current that is somewhat greater than that of
the InGaAs/AlInAs APD discussed above, but substantially smaller than that of the
Ge-on-Si APD. The gain—bandwidth product is anticipated to be GB > 300 GHz.
The ionization ratio К = 0.01 at a mean гаш G = 10 is comparable to that of Si
(Example 19.6-4).

Photodetectors in the 800-900-nm Wavelength Range

As discussed in Sec. 25.2A, first-generation optical fiber communication systems oper-
ated at Ло = 870 nm to match the wavelength of the GaAs LEDs and laser diodes that
were developed in the early 1960s (Sec. 18.1C). Short-haul silica-fiber-based systems
that are implemented today in this wavelength range make use of Al,Ga;_,As sources
(Sec. 25.1B).

Si PIN and APD Photodetectors. Silicon рп, photodiodes and APDs are highly
effective in this wavelength range. A commercially available Si PIN photodiode oper-
ating at 850 nm, for example, has a quantum efficiency 7 = 0.9, a responsivity К == 0.6
A/W (Fig. 19.3-9), and a bandwidth В = 15 GHz.

In the domain of Si APDs, a separate absorption and multiplication (SAM) reach-
through APD has its peak sensitivity at a wavelength of 800 nm (Example 19.6-3).
Under specified operating conditions, this device has a quantum efficiency 7 = 0.8, a
mean gain G = 50, a gain—-bandwidth product GB = 350 GHz, and an ionization ratio
k = 0.02.

Photodetectors in the Mid Infrared

As discussed in Sec. 25.1B, interest in mid-infrared optical fiber communications has
been fostered by advances in fluoride and other soft-glass fibers (Sec. 10.5), by the
advent of quantum cascade lasers (Sec. 18.4D), and by improvements in mid-infrared
detectors (Sec. 19.4).

HgCdTe APD Photodetectors. Substantial progress has been made in the quality
of Hg,Cd;_,Te SAM APDs, which have cutoff wavelengths that extend from 2 to
11 дм in the mid IR. A device such as that_described in Example 19.4-5 enjoys
high quantum efficiency (7 = 0.9), high gain (G > 1000), and large gain—bandwidth
product (GB > 1 THz), although it requires cryogenic cooling. The ionization ratio
К = 015 superior to that of Si (Example 19.6-4) so that the excess noise factor
Е = (G’)/(G)?, defined in (19.6-24), is limited to F < 2 and is independent of
(С). The gain—voltage characteristic is exponential.

1238  CHAPTER25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

E. Photonic Integrated Circuits

Contemporary optical fiber communication systems make use of advanced modulation
formats to achieve high capacities. Highly coherent lasers with narrow linewidths
are often required. Silicon photonics provides a useful platform for fabricating high-
quality on-chip light sources that rely on the integration of direct-bandgap Ш-У photon
emitters with CMOS-compatible silicon substrates (Sec. 18.1D). Quantum-dot active
regions often replace their quantum-well cousins because of reduced sensitivity to
temperature variations and to dislocations arising from the juxtaposition of the different
materials (Sec. 18.4C).

As discussed in Chapter 9, integrated photonics (integrated optics) is the technol-
ogy of combining, on a single chip, collections of optical devices and components to
achieve a particular purpose or carry out a specific function. The design and fabrication
of photonic integrated circuits (PICs) draws on integrated photonics and silicon
photonics. PICs serve to miniaturize and increase the density of photonic circuitry
in much the same way that electronic integrated circuits (ICs) miniaturize and increase
the density of electronic circuitry. In monolithic PICs, the various elements are simul-
taneously fabricated on the same chip, and that there are many chips per wafer. Passive
PICs are also called planar lightwave circuits (PLCs) and PICs that incorporate both
photonic and electronic components are also referred to as optoelectronic integrated
circuits (ОЕТС$) Group-IV PICs can comprise Si waveguides, together with Ge-based
lasers, modulators, and photodetectors.

The telecommunications industry long relied on PICs fabricated wholly from Ш-
V materials since these semiconductors readily emit light, accommodate modulation
via the electro-optic effect, and can be lattice-matched to a range of related materials.
Though thousands of devices can be integrated into an InP-based PIC with high yield,
the fabrication process is complex and expensive. In contrast, the compatibility of Si-
based PICs with CMOS, and the manifold benefits of group-IV materials, yield far
higher integration densities along with more efficient and less expensive integration.
Moreover, silicon-photonics-based PICs can offer improved functionality by drawing
on the different salutary features of Ш-У materials and silicon. As an example, high
gain can be provided by а Ш-У direct-bandgap material while photon storage is rele-
gated to a ring resonator in an undoped silicon layer with low loss and high Q.

PICs often incorporate collections of standard on-chip building blocks, such as
lasers, modulators, couplers, splitters, amplifiers, and photodiodes. Optical waveguides
link the various components. PICs find use in generating, focusing, splitting, combin-
ing, isolating, polarizing, coupling, modulating, transporting, multiplexing, switching,
and detecting light. Higher-level PICs can incorporate both transmitter and receiver
functionalities on the same chip and function as optical transceivers (optochips) and
coherent optical transceivers. These devices find application in a broad variety of
optical communication systems and networks, including telecom (long-haul, short-
haul, and undersea), datacom (LANs and datacenters), and computer-com (chip inter-
connects and high-performance computing — see Sec. 24.1D). Transceiver PICs that
incorporate standard on-chip building blocks along with filters and wavelength multi-
plexers/demultiplexers are commercially available at bit rates exceeding 100 Gb/s.
PICs also find use as chip-based phase-sensitive sensors and in applications such as
night-vision monitoring, integrated-optical gyroscopy, and lidar.

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
The simplest communication system is a point-to-point link. The information is carried
by a physical variable (e.g., electrical, electromagnetic, or optical) containing a signal
that is transmitted at one point and received at another. Transmitting more than one

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1239
signal simultaneously through the same link requires that the signals be marked by
some distinct attribute (e.g., time, frequency, or wavelength) or identified by some
distinct code. This scheme is called multiplexing.

In an optical fiber communication system, the link is an optical fiber that carries
a light wave modulated by the signal. The modulated physical variable carrying the
information may be the optical intensity, amplitude, frequency, phase, or polarization.
The most straightforward example is an intensity-modulated optical communication
system, as illustrated in Fig. 25.2-1.

мкА SI VAL,
> Transmitter -O (0) O=| Receiver OH
(a) ! Fiber ‘
101001 101 (()) 101001 10 т
(b) у Fiber !
Figure 25.2-1 Optical fiber communication systems using intensity modulation. (а) Analog
system: the power of the light source is proportional to the signal, which is a continuous function
of time that could represent, for example, ап audio or video waveform. (5) Digital ON-OFF keying
system: the states “1” and “0” of a bit are represented, respectively, by the presence and absence of
an optical pulse.
The simplest example of optical multiplexing is wavelength-division multiplexing
(WDM), in which multiple optical signals are transmitted through the same fiber at
distinct optical wavelengths, as illustrated in Fig. 25.2-2.
Ay Cm oA,
dy = о | о о»
oy МГ Figure 25.2-2 Wavelength-
| Ay om x му division multiplexing (WDM).

One measure of the performance of an analog communication system is its band-
width B (Hz). This is the maximum frequency at which modulated optical power
may be transmitted through the link such that the received signal is detectable with a
prescribed signal-to-noise ratio. The bandwidth is determined by the response time of
the overall communication channel as well as by the attenuation and the noise level at
the receiver.

An analogous measure of the performance of a digital communication system is the
maximum bit rate Bo (bits per second, or b/s) at which bits of the received signal
are discernible with an error rate not exceeding a prescribed value. This data rate is
determined by the attenuation and pulse spreading introduced by the system, as well as
by the noise level at the receiver. The bit rates displayed in Table 25.2-1 represent
optical carrier (OC) levels defined by the Synchronous Optical Network (SONET)
standard for optical telecommunications technology.

Table 25.2-1 Approximate bit rates for the SONET standard.
OC-1 OC-3 OC-12 OC-24 OC-48  OC-192 OC-768 OC-1920
52 Mb/s) 156 МЫ 622 МЬз 1.25Gb/s_ 2.5Gb/s 1005 4005 100 Gb/s

1240 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

This section begins with an overview of the evolution of optical fiber communica-
tion systems and is followed by a quantitative analysis of the performance limits of
simple digital and analog systems that make use of intensity modulation.

A. Evolution of Optical Fiber Communication Systems

As illustrated in Fig. 25.1-2, the minimum attenuation in silica-glass fibers occurs at
Xo = 1550 nm, whereas the minimum material dispersion occurs at Ао ^ 1312 nm.
The choice of which of these wavelengths should be used to build a link depends on
the availability of an appropriate light source as well as on the relative importance
of power loss and pulse spreading, as explained in Sec. 25.2B. First-generation op-
tical fiber communication systems operated at \, = 870 nm, the wavelength of the
earliest available light-emitting diodes and laser diodes, which were fabricated from
GaAs. However, optical-fiber attenuation and material dispersion are both relatively
high at this wavelength, so subsequent systems were constructed using longer wave-
lengths as more advanced semiconductor materials became available. Second- and
third-generation systems operated near 1310 and 1550 nm, respectively.

There are many possible combinations of operating wavelengths, devices, materials,
and fibers that can be used to build an optical link — some of these are portrayed in
Fig. 25.2-3. As new materials and capabilities have come to the fore, the implemen-
tation of fiber systems has generally proceeded along the following paths: (1) from
shorter to longer wavelengths; (2) from multimode fibers (MMFs) to single-mode
fibers (SMFs); (3) from light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to laser diodes (LDs); (4) from
p-i—n photodiodes (PINs) to avalanche photodiodes (APDs); (5) from semiconductor
optical amplifiers (SOAs) to optical fiber amplifiers (OFAs); and (6) from direct detec-
tion to coherent detection. This evolution has been made possible in large part by ad-
vances in bandgap engineering and glass engineering. The former allowed remarkable
quaternary semiconductor components to be developed for use at longer wavelengths
while the latter facilitated effective new designs for silica-glass optical fibers.

О Е S@LU
Wavelength |
Ло (ит) 800 90 100 100 1200 1300 1400 1500 [1600 1700
D pin Si
EDFA

Amplifier: OFA REFA

RFA
Fiber: MMF: SI/ GRIN Silica glass
Figure 25.2-3 Materials commonly used for optical sources, detectors, amplifiers, and fibers,
along with the ranges of wavelengths over which they operate. Gray and white vertical columns
represent various optical fiber telecommunications bands. The first three generations of fiber-optic
links operated at wavelengths near 870 nm, 1310 nm, and 1550 nm, respectively.

The evolution of fiber components and systems has been motivated by the desire
to increase the transmission bit rate Bg (b/s) as well as the length Г, (km) of the

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1241
communication link. Both Bg and the product [Bp (usually expressed in units of km-
Gb/s) serve as measures to gauge the advancement of fiber communication systems.

The nine system generations discussed in the following pages characterize this
evolution and Fig. 25.2-4 depicts the increase realized in Во and Г.Во as time has
progressed. The first three systems, which are often referred to as the first three gen-
erations of optical fiber systems, achieved a 1000-fold increase in [Bo from 1974 to

1990. For simplicity, we use these technologies as examples for evaluating system

performance, as discussed in Sec. 25.2B. As is evident in Fig. 25.2-4, subsequent

progress has extended these basic systems in a number of directions, and has led to
an increase of Ву and [Во by an additional eight orders of magnitude from 1990 to

2015. This tenfold increase every four years is known as “optical Moore’s law.”

101! =

1910 @spm A> -|1Pbis

102 ® Digital oy

> coherent_=

8 108 a

В 107 @\рм —* 1Tb/s

р .7 =

= 10° „у LO

Я 104 ipo 1Gbis

2 и On (DSP) 2

o 10° - = =;

8 10? От ae (© Soliton

10 0870 nm 20 /@ Coherent

, ZO

1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020

Figure 25.2-4 The development of optical fiber communication systems over the years reveals a
continuous growth of bit rate Bo (right ordinate) and bit-rate—distance product LBo (left ordinate,
generally with L = 10000 km). Solid blue curves represent the earliest systems. Dotted black
curves indicate systems that were developed subsequently but not widely implemented. Green curves
represent systems that have been widely deployed over land and under sea. Red curves indicate
systems developed more recently. Systems ()—Q) incorporate both OFAs and WDM. The superb
performance of the newer systems has led to the decommissioning of most commercial links based
on Systems (0-6). The straight dashed line represents an “optical Moore’s law” that reveals a tenfold
increase in bit rate every four years.

System (О: Multimode fiber (MMF) at 870 nm. This was the early technology of the
1970s. Fibers were either step-index or graded-index. The light source was
either an LED or a laser diode (initially GaAs and subsequently AlGaAs).
Both Si p-z—n and APD photodetectors were used. System performance
was limited by high fiber attenuation and modal dispersion. A typical
communication link of this era operated at Бо = 100 Mb/s, and had a
length of Г = 10 km, yielding [By = 1 km-Gb/s. Several optical links
could be concatenated to form a longer link for intercity communication
by inserting optical-electrical-optical (OEO) units, known as repeaters or
regenerators, between consecutive links. Each such repeater implemented
three processes: photodetection, electrical amplification, and optical signal
regeneration.

1242 — СНАРТЕВ25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

System (2): Single-mode fiber (SMF) at 1310 nm. The move to single-mode fibers and
to a wavelength region with minimal material dispersion in the 1980 time
frame led to a substantial improvement in performance, which was limited
by fiber attenuation. InGaAsP laser diodes were used with either InGaAs p—
1—п or APD photodetectors (sometimes Ge APDs). A typical long-haul link
in this class operated at OC-12 (622 Mb/s) with an OEO repeater spacing
of Г, = 40 km, yielding [Bg = 25 km-Gb/s.

System (3): Single-mode fiber (SMF) at 1550 пт. Silica-glass fibers were used in the
1550-nm wavelength range, where their attenuation is lowest. Performance
was limited by material dispersion, which was reduced by employing low-
chirp single-frequency distributed-feedback (DFB) laser diodes (InGaAsP).
APDs were often used. The subsequent use of dispersion-shifted fibers
(DSF) reduced the deleterious effects of dispersion and boosted perfor-
mance. An example of this system is a long-haul terrestrial or undersea link
operating at 2.5 Gb/s (OC-48) over a distance of L = 100 km, so that LD By =
250 km-Gb/s. Further advances in transmitters and receivers boosted the bit
rate of this system to 10 Gb/s (OC-192), bringing L.Bp to = 1 km-Tb/s.

System @): Coherent receiver. Coherent detection is a technique in which light from
a local source (called the local oscillator) is mixed with the received
signal light at a photodetector (see Sec. 25.4). This is in contrast to direct
detection, in which the intensity of the signal light is directly detected
by the photodetector. Though the use of coherent detection enhances
receiver sensitivity, thereby allowing greater distances between repeaters,
this benefit comes at the expense of increased system complexity. As a
result, the commercial implementation of coherent systems lagged behind
that of direct-detection systems, particularly because of the enhancement
provided by the emergence of the optical fiber amplifier (OFA).

System (5): Optical solitons. Solitons are short (typically 1 to 50 ps) optical pulses
that can travel through long optical fibers without changing the shape
of their pulse envelope. As discussed in Sec. 23.5B, the effects of fiber
dispersion and nonlinear self-phase modulation (arising, for example, from
the optical Kerr effect) precisely cancel, so that the pulses act as if they
were traveling through a linear, nondispersive medium. Both erbium-doped
and Raman fiber amplification can be effectively used in conjunction with
soliton transmission to overcome absorption and scattering losses. In 2002,
Deutsche Telekom conducted a trial using Lucent’s LAMBDAXTREME
DWDM system with dispersion-managed transmission and Raman ampli-
fication. The system offered 128 WDM channels, each with a capacity of
10 Gb/s, providing Ву = 1.28 Tb/s and yielding Г.Во = 5120 km-Tb/s over
a fiber length of Г, = 4000 km. However, the dispersion characteristics of
existing fiber links are often not well-suited to optical-soliton systems and
the technology has not been avidly pursued.

System (6): Optical fiber amplifiers (OFAs). The advent of the erbium-doped fiber
amplifier (EDFA) in 1987 (see Sec. 25.1C) had an extraordinary impact
on the performance of optical fiber communication systems. Placed
periodically along the fiber, these amplifiers compensate for loss by
optically boosting the signal, thus dramatically increasing the distance over
which information can be transmitted. The first transpacific link to employ
OFAs was the TPC-5 cable network, which comprised four single-mode
fibers in the form of a ring that operated at bit rate Ву = 10 Gb/s over а
distance of Г, = 22500 km, yielding D.Bo = 225 km-Tb/s.

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1243

System (1): Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM). WDM systems make use of
multiple wavelengths (channels) transmitted through the same fiber, which
provides a dramatic increase in system capacity. Broadband optical fiber
amplifiers provide simultaneous amplification for all channels. Single-
wavelength long-haul links can be upgraded to WDM status by simply
replacing the equipment at the ends of the link, while retaining the existing
OFAs. Capacity is increased with the addition of dispersion-managed
transmission and forward error correction. An example of a WDM link is
the TPE transpacific cable network between the U.S. and China completed
in 2010. The bit rate for each fiber of this eight fiber-pair cable is 10 Gb/s
per channel and Bo = 5.12 Tb/s. With Г = 18000 km, LBy = 92 km-Pb/s.

System (8): Digital coherent receiver with spectrally efficient coding. The success
of WDM in the 1990s and 2000s was followed by an effort to enhance
system spectral efficiency [(b/s)/Hz]. This fueled a resurgence of interest
in coherent systems, coupled with the use of WDM and optimized digital
coding and signal processing. The first transpacific link employing digital
coherent technology was the FASTER submarine cable network, which
began service in 2016. This system makes use of six pairs of extremely
low-loss fibers without dispersion-compensation sections (digital signal
processing compensates for the cumulative dispersion at the end of the
cable, thereby avoiding optical-amplifier noise). Each of the twelve fibers
operates at 100 Gb/s per channel; with 100 WDM channels the overall bit
rate is thus Во = 60 Tb/s in each direction. Transmission over a distance Г,
= 9000 km between Oregon and Japan yields Г.Во = 540 km-Pb/s. Making
use of the C+L-bands, the 2018 Pacific Light Cable Network (PLCN) offers
a capacity By = 120 Tb/s, double that of the FASTER system. Stretching
from Los Angeles to Hong Kong, a distance Г, = 12800 km, the PLCN
network attains L.Bp = 1.5 km-Eb/s.

System Q): Space-division multiplexing (SDM). With spectral bandwidth exhausted
in the service of WDM, and spectral efficiency and phase modulation
optimized for digital coherent detection, the only degree of freedom
remaining available for increasing system capacity is space. This has
led to renewed consideration of exploiting multimode fibers in which
distinct spatial-mode distributions serve as independent channels. Also
being developed for SDM are multicore fibers in which each core carries
a few spatial modes. Multiplexers and demultiplexers, along with digital
signal processing techniques to compensate for inherent crosstalk, are being
developed. As an example, the availability of 50 spatial channels and 100
WDM channels provides a total of 5000 channels; at 200 Gb/s per channel,
a single fiber can support a bit rate of 1 Pb/s.

B. Performance of Optical Fiber Communication Systems
The first step in assessing the performance of an optical fiber communication system is
to construct a mathematical model that describes the effect of the various system com-
ponents, principally the optical fiber, on the modulated signal. This permits the shape
of the received distorted signal to be estimated, and hence permits a determination of
the signal-to-noise ratio for analog systems and the expected bit error rate for digital
systems.

In most applications, the fiber may be treated as a linear system described by an
impulse response function h(t) or its Fourier transform, the transfer function H(f),
where f is the modulation frequency (see Appendix A). Three important parameters
characterize these functions:

1244 — СНАРТЕВ25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
= Power transmission. This is the fraction of steady (unmodulated) input optical
power received at the output. It is given by the transfer function H(f) at f =
0; Н(0) = f h(t) dt is the area under h(t) since H(f) is the Fourier trans-
form of h(t). For a fiber of length Г and attenuation coefficient « (dB/km),
H(0) = exp(—aZL), where a is the attenuation coefficient in units of km~', which
is related to x ма а = 0.23a. Localized power losses at couplers may also be
included in « in distributed units of dB/km.

= The response time о. is the width of h(t). It determines the temporal spreading

of optical pulses and therefore sets the maximum data rate that can be used
in digital systems. In a single-mode fiber, for example, (25.1-3) provides that
0, = |D\o)L, where ол (nm) is the source linewidth and D (ps/km-nm) is the
dispersion coefficient. The response time is proportional to the fiber length.

= The bandwidth of (Hz) is the width of the transfer function |H(f)|. In an analog

system, the bandwidth determines the maximum frequency at which the input
power may be modulated and successfully detected by the receiver. Since H(f)
and h(t) are related by a Fourier transform, the bandwidth oy is inversely pro-
portional to the response time о’. The coefficient of proportionality depends оп
the specific profile of h(t) (see Appendix A, Sec. A.2). Here, we use the relation
of = 1/2n0, for purposes of illustration.

The maximum fiber length that can be used to transmit a signal with a desired
performance level is set by the following principal impairments introduced by the
system:

= Attenuation results in an exponential decrease of the optical power as а func-

tion of distance [Fig. 25.2-5(a)]. At a distance for which the received power
becomes smaller than the receiver sensitivity (the minimum power required by
the receiver), the system’s performance becomes unacceptable.

= Dispersion results in an increase of the width of the optical pulses that represent

data bits in a digital system as a function of distance [Fig. 25.2-5(b)]. When the
width exceeds the bit interval, adjacent pulses overlap, resulting in intersymbol
interference (ISI), which introduces undesirable errors. In an analog system,
dispersion washes out high-frequency components of the modulated signal and
reduces the system’s bandwidth.

= Noise added by optical components, such as optical amplifiers, and by random

propagation effects, such as polarization mode dispersion, introduces additional
errors.

= Nonlinear distortion associated with intense optical pulses results in the cross

mixing of spectral components, and the introduction of interference between mul-
tiplexed signals in wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) systems.
= |
5 SE више У о
С g
=
Distance —> Distance —>~
(a) Attenuation (b) Dispersion
Figure 25.2-5 (a) Dependence of the optical power on distance. (5) Dependence of the pulse width
on distance. The maximum length of the optical link is set by either (a) attenuation, when the received
power drops below the receiver sensitivity; or (b) dispersion, when the pulse width exceeds the bit
time.

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1245
The communication system is more sensitive to transmission impairments at high
bit rates (or high modulation frequencies) because of the following effects:
= For a fixed average power, a higher bit rate corresponds to fewer photons per bit,
and therefore to greater photon noise. Other noise sources in the receiver also
become more important at high data rates. The receiver sensitivity is therefore an
increasing function of the bit rate [Fig. 25.2-6(a)].
= A higher bit rate corresponds to shorter pulses [Fig. 25.2-6(b)] with broader spec-
tra and greater dispersion. Such pulses undergo greater broadening, which leads
to greater intersymbol interference (ISI).
= For a fixed optical energy per bit, a higher bit rate (shorter bit time) requires
greater optical power [Fig. 25.2-6(c)], which evokes nonlinear interactions lead-
ing to nonlinear ISI.
> № Е .
: WN
3 a 3
YZ Ses. =
Mm
Bit rate —»> Bit rate —> Bit rate —>
(а) (d) (c)
Figure 25.2-6 Effect of bit rate on (a) receiver sensitivity, (b) pulse width at the receiver, and
(c) peak power. At higher bit rates, the communication system is more sensitive to attenuation,
dispersion, and nonlinear effects.
Bit Error Rate
The performance of a digital communication system is measured by the probability
of error per bit, which is referred to as the bit error rate (BER). For an ON-OFF
keying (OOK) system, such as that schematized in Fig. 25.2-1, the logic states “1” and
“0” are represented, respectively, by the presence and absence of an optical pulse (see
Sec. 19.6E). If ру is the probability of mistaking “1” for “0”, and ро is the probability
of mistaking “0” for “1”, and if the two bits are equally likely to be transmitted, the
BER = $P1 + $P0- A typical acceptable BER is 10~°, corresponding to an average
of one error every 10° bits. Errors occur as a result of noise in the received signal,
or they arise from pulse spreading into neighboring bits, which results in intersymbol
interference (ISI). Figure 25.2-7 displays an example of random realizations of the
pulse corresponding to state “1”, superimposed with random realizations of the signal
received from possible neighboring pulses when the state is “О”, This portrayal is called
the eye diagram. The more open the “eye,” the more distinguishable are the “1” and
“0” states and the smaller the likelihood of error.
т \ 1 | 1 \\ | \ Yi
№ 6 WW Woy
~<— T —» t <— T — t <— T— t
Figure 25.2-7 Closing of the eye diagram (left to right) as a result of noise and pulse broadening.

1246 — CHAPTER25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

Receiver Sensitivity

The sensitivity of a digital optical receiver is defined as the minimum number of
photons (or the corresponding optical energy) per bit required to guarantee that the
rate of error (BER) is smaller than a prescribed value (e.g., 10~°). Errors occur because
of randomness in the number of photoelectrons detected during each bit and because
of noise in the receiver circuit itself. The sensitivity of digital optical receivers under
various conditions has been considered in Sec. 19.6E.

The simplest example of such a receiver is an ON-OFF keying (OOK) optical ге-
ceiver in which the light source emits Poisson photons, the detector has unity quantum
efficiency, and the receiver circuit is noise-free. An average of at least по = 10 photons
per bit is required to achieve a BER < 107° in such a system, so the sensitivity of
this ideal optical receiver is 10 photons/bit. This signifies that state “1” should carry an
average of at least 20 photons/bit, since state “0” carries zero photons. In the presence
of other forms of noise, a larger number of photons per bit is required (Table 19.6-1).

A sensitivity of по photons per bit corresponds to an optical energy of Рипо per bit
and an optical power of Р. = (йито)/(1/Во) per bit, so that

P, = hvnoBo, (25.2-1)
which is proportional to the bit rate Во. As the bit rate increases, P, must increase
commensurately to keep the number of photons/bit (and therefore the BER) constant.
When circuit noise is important, the receiver sensitivity по depends on the receiver
bandwidth (1.е., on the data rate Во), as discussed in Sec. 19.6E. This behavior com-
plicates the design problem so for simplicity we assume in the following analyses that
the sensitivity (photons per bit) of the receiver is independent of Bo.

It will become apparent in the sequel that the design of long-haul, high-bit-rate
optical fiber communication links involves the selection of fibers with the lowest atten-
uation and/or dispersion, careful power and pulse-width budgeting, and the avoidance
of deleterious nonlinear effects associated with ultra-intense pulses.

C. Attenuation- and Dispersion-Limited Systems

We now proceed to examine the performance limits imposed by attenuation and dis-
persion оп an elementary digital, intensity-modulation, ON-OFF keying (OOK) system.
For simplicity, nonlinear effects are ignored and the fiber transmission system itself is
assumed to introduce no noise. We consider an optical fiber link operated as a digital
communication system at a data rate of Bo b/s over a distance of L (km). The source
has power P, (mW), wavelength Ло (nm), and spectral width ох (nm). The fiber has
attenuation coefficient « (dB/km) and chromatic dispersion coefficient ДО» (ps/km-
nm). The receiver has a sensitivity of по (photons per bit), corresponding to a power
sensitivity P, = (йсо/Ло)по Bo (mW); these values must be attained for the system to
operate at an acceptable error rate.

The performance limits are established by determining the maximum distance Г,
over which the link can transmit Во b/s without exceeding the prescribed bit error rate.
Clearly, Г, decreases with increasing Во. Alternatively, we may determine the maxi-
mum bit rate Во that a link of length Г, can transmit with an error rate not exceeding the
allowable limit. The maximum bit-rate—distance product [Bo thus serves as a metric
that describes the capability of the link. We shall determine the typical dependence of
Г оп Во, and derive expressions for the maximum bit-rate—distance product Г.Бо for
various types of fibers.

Two conditions must be satisfied for acceptable operation of the link:

1. The received power must be at least equal to the receiver power sensitivity P,.

This condition is met by preparing a power budget from which the maximum
fiber length is determined. A margin of 6 dB above Р, is usually specified.

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1247

2. The width of the received pulses must not significantly exceed the bit time in-

terval 1/Bo to avoid overlap of adjacent pulses, which leads to intersymbol
interference and increases the error rate. This condition is met by preparing a
budget for the pulse spreading resulting from the transmitter, the receiver, and
various forms of dispersion in the fiber.

If the bit rate Bo is fixed and the link length Г, is increased, two situations leading
to performance degradation can occur: the received power becomes smaller than the
receiver power sensitivity P, , or the received pulses become wider than the bit time
1/Bo. If the former situation occurs first, the link is said to be attenuation limited. If
the latter occurs first, the link is said to be dispersion limited.
Aittenuation-Limited Performance: Power Budget
Attenuation-limited performance is assessed by preparing a power budget. Since fiber
attenuation is measured in dB units, it is convenient to also measure optical power in
dB units. Using 1 mW as а reference, dBm units are defined by

Р = 10 logy, P, PinmW,  P indBm. (25.2-2)
As examples, P = 0.1 mW, 1 mW, and 10 mW correspond to P = —10 dBm, 0 dBm,
and 10 dBm, respectively. In these logarithmic units, power losses are additive.

If P, is the source power (dBm), « is the fiber loss (dB/km), Рх is the splicing and
coupling loss (dB), and Г, is the maximum fiber length such that the power delivered
to the receiver is equal to the receiver sensitivity P, (dBm), then

Р. -Р. - Pm — aL =P, (dB units), (25.2-3)
where Ри, is a safety margin. The optical power is plotted schematically in Fig. 25.2-8
as a function of the link distance from the transmitter.
Transmitter Fiber Fiber Receiver
СОС [=
Connector Connector Connector
Py на,
3 г
= \
a /
ы }
р Receiver sensitivity Margin Pm {
p beeen RCE IVET SENSITIVITY IT
0 L Zz
Figure 25.2-8 Power budget for an attenuation-limited fiber-optic link.
The receiver power sensitivity P, = 10 log;, P, (dBm) is obtained from (25.2-1):
Tip hv Bi
P, = 10log( ~——" )_ dBm. (25.2-4)
10-3
Thus, P, increases logarithmically with Во, and the power budget must therefore be
adjusted for the value of Bo, as illustrated in Fig. 25.2-9.

1248 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
oL------ ~~ Somme powerPs ee
Е
aL
3 -20 ИРУ
2 _30 | cil
5. cee
= Ре+Р <i
3 2—2 сх
©. —50 3х9 $
|) Ре Bere
—60 —
-70 ==
100k 1M 10M 100M 1G 10G
Bit rate Во (b/s)
Figure 25.2-9 Power budget as a function of bit rate Во for an attenuation-limited fiber-optic link.
As Во increases, the power P, per bit required at the receiver increases (so that the energy per bit
remains constant), and the maximum fiber length Г, decreases.
The maximum length of the link is obtained by substituting (25.2-4) into (25.2-3),
1 Tip hv В
L=—(~,—P.—P, —10log ———” J, (25.2-5)
x 10-3
which yields
10
DL = [Ip — — log Bo, (25.2-6)
х Attenuation-Limited
Fiber Length
where Lo = [P; —Pe—Pm —30—10 log(Mip №) /х. The maximum link length decreases
with increasing bit rate Bo at a logarithmic rate with slope —10/a. Figure 25.2-10 is a
plot of this relation for the operating wavelengths 870, 1300, and 1550 nm.
1000
> 1550 nm
Е
Е
р 100 . 1300 пт
Е = 2.5 dB/km
я Coaxial ^^. $70 nm
cable oe
10 “-.
100k 1M 10M 100M 1G 10G
Bit rate Bo (b/s)
Figure 25.2-10 Maximum fiber length Г, as a function of bit rate Во under attenuation-limited
conditions for a fused silica-glass fiber operating at wavelengths A, = 870, 1300, and 1550 nm,
assuming fiber attenuation coefficients x = 2.5, 0.35, and 0.16 dB/km, respectively. Source power
P, = 1 mW (P, = 0 dBm); receiver sensitivity по = 300 photons/bit for receivers operating at 870
and 1300 nm, and Mo = 1000 for the receiver operating at 1550 nm; and P, = Ри = 0. The LBo
relation for a typical coaxial cable is shown for comparison.

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1249
Dispersion-Limited Performance: Time Budget
When a pulse representing a data bit is generated by the transmitter, propagated through
the fiber, and detected by the receiver, it loses power and increases in width. The
final pulse width оо depends on the original pulse width o,, the response time of
the transmitter o;,, the response time of the fiber о, imparted by various forms of
dispersion, and the response time of the receiver 0,x. The actual shape of the received
pulse may be determined by convolving the original pulse profile with the impulse
response functions of the transmitter, the fiber, and the receiver (assuming that all
systems are linear). Moreover, if all functions are taken to be Gaussian, the square of
the width of the final pulse is the sum of the squares of the widths of all the constituent
functions, so that 5 5 5
бо = 95 + Оз, (25.2-7)
where 5 5 5 5
Osys = бы +9; 0х, (25.2-8)
with озуз representing the width of the response function of the entire communication
system (transmitter + fiber + receiver). These relations are used in the practical design
of systems even though the response functions are not actually Gaussian.

A principal design condition for the communication link ensures that the width of
the received pulse does not exceed a prescribed fraction of the bit period T = 1/Bo
to avoid intersymbol interference. A time budget, such as that presented in Fig. 25.2-
11, must be prepared to ensure that this condition is met. The choice of that fraction
is arbitrary and a number of ad hoc values are used. As an example, some designers
require that the system’s response time озу not exceed 70% of the bit period for non-
return-to-zero (NRZ) pulses and 35% for return-to-zero (RZ) pulses (these modulation
formats are defined in Fig. 25.3-4).

Fiber
Transmitter Receiver
Lint
Or
07
[ oF,
a
0 L 5

Figure 25.2-11 Budget for the pulse temporal width in а dispersion-limited fiber-optic link.

For a given receiver and transmitter, the design of the link centers around determin-
ing the maximum allowable fiber length Г. Since the only length-dependent contribu-
tion to dsys is 7; associated with the fiber, in the following analysis we adopt a design
criterion that limits the value of 0, to 1/4 of the bit-time interval T, 1.е.,

д; = ТТ =1/4Bo. (25.2-9)
The choice of the factor 1/4 is clearly arbitrary and simply allows us to conveniently
compare the different types of fibers. We now consider the distance versus bit-rate rela-
tions that arise from this condition for the various dispersion-limited cases considered
in Sec. 25.1A. The results are discussed below and plotted in Fig. 25.2-12.

1250 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
1000 ’
` ) 1.55 ит
PA
= 1004 1
Е AN А \
з Graded-index S iN Transform-
8 Step-index \,_ limited
| NANI
10 \
\ NZ-DSF
VV
1 г)
100k 1M 10M 100M 1G 10G 100G 1T
Bit rate Bo (b/s)
Figure 25.2-12 Dispersion-limited maximum fiber length Г, as a function of the bit rate Bo for
multimode fibers (MMF) and single-mode fibers (SMF). Six lines are shown (left to right): (а) MMF,
step-index (п, = 1.46, А = 0.01), [Во = 10 km-Mb/s; (5) MMF, graded-index with parabolic
profile (п1 = 1.46, A = 0.01), LBy = 2 km-Gb/s; (с) SMF limited by material dispersion, operating
at 1550 nm with Эх = 17 ps/km-nm and сх = 1 nm, [Во = 15 km-Gb/s; (d) SMF limited by
material dispersion, operating at 1300 nm with |D)| = 1 ps/km-nm and ох = 1 nm, LBo = 250 km-
Gb/s; (е) SMF with transform limited pulses operating at 1550 nm with D, = 17 ps/km-nm; (f) same
as (e) with non-zero dispersion-shifted fiber (NZ-DSF) with chromatic dispersion coefficient О» = 4
ps/km-nm.
= Multimode fiber (MMF). For multimode fiber, the width of the received pulse after
propagation a distance Г, is dominated by modal dispersion. For step-index fibers,
(25.1-2) and (25.2-9) result in the [Bo relation
C1
2 Step-Index MMF
where с1 = со/пл is the speed of light in the core material and A = (п —
72) /пл is the fiber fractional index difference. In a graded-index (GRIN) fiber with
an optimal (approximately parabolic) refractive-index profile, the pulse width is
smaller by a factor 2/A, and Bo is greater by the same factor. Рог n; = 1.46
and А = 0.01, the bit-rate-distance product Г.Во = 10 km-Mb/s for step-index
fibers and [Bp = 2 km-Gb/s for graded-index fibers.
= Single-mode fiber (SMF). Assuming that pulse broadening in a single-mode fiber
results from material dispersion only (i.e., neglecting waveguide dispersion), then
for a source of linewidth oy, the width of the received pulse is given by (25.1-3),
so that
1
Во = ———, (25.2-11)
4|D|on SMF

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1251
where D) is the dispersion coefficient of the fiber material. For operation near
Ло = 1300 nm, |D)| may be as small as 1 ps/km-nm. Assuming that ох = 1 nm
(roughly the linewidth of a single-mode laser diode), the bit-rate—distance product
Г.Во = 250 km-Gb/s. For operation near A, = 1550 nm, О» = 17 ps/km-nm, and
for the same source spectral width (сх = 1 nm), we have Г.Во = 15 km-Gb/s.

= Single-mode fiber with transform-limited pulses. To reduce chromatic dispersion,
the spectral linewidth о» of the source must be small. Spectral widths that are a
small fraction of 1 nm may be obtained by using single-frequency lasers with ex-
ternal modulators. However, an extremely narrow spectral width is incompatible
with an extremely short pulse because of the Fourier transform relation between
the spectral and temporal distributions. As described in Sec. A.2 of Appendix A,
pulses with the smallest product of temporal and spectral widths have a Gaussian
profile. Such transform-limited pulses therefore suffer the least dispersion. A
transform-limited Gaussian pulse of width то and complex envelope exp(—t?/7))
has a Gaussian spectral intensity of width (FWHM) o,, = 0.375/7, as provided in
(23.1-10). This corresponds to ол = |OA,/Ov|o, = (A2/co)ov = 0.375A2/eoT0.
If the pulse has a width equal to half a bit period, 1.е., 7 = T/2 = 1/2Bo, then

2
ах = 0.75—* Bo, (25.2-12)
Со

which is directly proportional to the bit rate Во. For example, for A, = 1550 пт
and By = 10 Gb/s, ох = 0.06 nm. As described in Sec. 23.3B, when a transform-
limited Gaussian pulse of width то travels through a dispersive medium with
dispersion coefficient D,, it is broadened by a factor of ,/2 at the characteristic
distance 20 = 17;’/D,. In particular, a pulse of initial width ло = 7/2 stretches
by a time (/2 — 1)T/2 = 0.21T. We may therefore take zp as the maximum
acceptable length Г, of the communication link. Using the relations L = z =

nt@/Dy,7 = Т/2 =1/2Bo, and D, = Олл? /со , we finally obtain
LB == (25.2-13)
41 Single-Mode Fiber
Transform-Limited Pulse
The maximum link distance L is therefore inversely proportional to B? so that it
decreases more rapidly with data rate than in the previous cases. Also, the product
BoL is inversely proportional to the data rate Bo. Figure 25.2-12 displays the
Г.Во relation for Ао = 1550 nm and О» = 17 ps/km-nm. For example, at Во
= 10 Gb/s, L = 64 km, but at Bo = 40 Gb/s, Г, decreases to 4 km. The use of
transform-limited pulses therefore extends the dispersion-limited bit rate bounds
substantially, although that rate decreases more rapidly with further increase of

the bit rate.

и Single-mode dispersion-compensated fiber with transform-limited pulses. With
single-mode fibers and transform-limited optical pulses, the maximum fiber dis-
tance for a given bit rate reaches its highest value, limited only by the dispersion
coefficient. This coefficient can be reduced by making use of dispersion-shifted
fibers (DSFs). As shown in Fig. 25.2-12, the use of a DSF to reduce Г)» from 17
ps/km-nm to 4 ps/km-nm increases the maximum link length from 64 km to 272
km at 10 Gb/s. However, DSF fibers have a slightly higher attenuation coefficient.

1252 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
Combined Attenuation- and Dispersion-Limited Performance
The attenuation-limited and dispersion-limited bit-rate—distance relations portrayed in
Figs. 25.2-10 and 25.2-12, respectively, are combined into Fig. 25.2-13 by selecting
the smaller of the attenuation- or dispersion-limited distances.
1000
1.55 um SMF
Nae
= 100 К \
= <—) \, Transform-
4 И ол=1пт \O{ limited
7 10 Step-index \ NZ-DSF
и
Ро \
Graded-index \
2 8%
i) ie)
(©) © ‘
1 К Jo Ему \
100k 1M 10M 100M 1G 10G 100G 1T
Bit rate Bo (b/s)
Figure 25.2-13 Maximum fiber-optic link distance Г, versus bit rate Во for a variety of situations.
This graph is obtained by superposing the attenuation-limited and dispersion-limited bit-rate—
distance curves presented in Figs. 25.2-10 and 25.2-12, respectively, and selecting the smaller of the
attenuation- or dispersion-limited distances. Each line in the figure represents the maximum distance
Г, of the link at each bit rate Bo that satisfies both the attenuation and dispersion limits, 1.е., that
guarantees the reception of the required power and pulse width at the receiver.
The graph in Fig. 25.2-13 is the result of an exercise that summarizes the per-
formance of the first three generations of optical fiber communication systems, as
portrayed in Fig. 25.2-4: System (Г) at A, = 870 nm (multimode); System (2) at 1310 nm
(single-mode); and System @) at 1550 nm (single-mode). A number of simplifying
assumptions and arbitrary choices have been made to create Fig. 25.2-13, so that
the values reported therein should be regarded only as indications of the order of
magnitude of the relative performance of the different types of fibers. Nevertheless,
a number of important conclusions can be drawn from this figure:
= At low bit rates, the fiber link is generally attenuation-limited; the length Г, de-
creases logarithmically with Во. At high bit rates, the link is dispersion limited
and Г, is inversely proportional to Во for optical pulses limited by the source
linewidth, and inversely proportional to B? for transform-limited optical pulses.

= For high-data-rate and long-haul communication links, single-mode fibers are
superior. The choice between operation at 1300 and 1550 nm is not obvious
since, for conventional fibers, chromatic dispersion is minimal at 1300 nm while
attenuation is minimal at 1550 nm. This is illustrated by the crossover of the L.Bo
lines for these wavelengths.

и The use of dispersion-shifted fibers (DSFs) enables the overall chromatic disper-

sion coefficient at 1550 nm to be reduced, which in general makes operation at
1550 nm superior to operation at 1300 nm.

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1253
Performance of an Analog Communication System
As with digital optical fiber communication links, the performance of an analog link
is limited by fiber attenuation and/or dispersion. Because of fiber attenuation, the
received signal is weakened and may not be discernible in noise. Because of fiber
dispersion, the transmission bandwidth о; = 1/270, is limited so that high-frequency
signal components are attenuated more than low-frequency components, resulting in
signal degradation. Both of these deleterious effects increase with increasing fiber
length Г. The received optical power decreases exponentially with Г, while the fiber
bandwidth is inversely proportional to L. Nonlinear optical effects do not play a role
in analog systems since the power is distributed rather than concentrated in narrow
pulses.

The maximum allowable length of an analog fiber link is determined by ensuring
that two conditions are met:

= The fiber attenuation must be sufficiently small so that the received power is

greater than the receiver power sensitivity P, .

= The fiber bandwidth оу must be greater than the spectral width В of the transmit-

ted signal.

As discussed in Sec. 19.6, the sensitivity of an analog optical receiver is the smallest
optical power required for the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the photocurrent to exceed
a prescribed value, SNRo. For an ideal receiver (with unity quantum efficiency and no
circuit noise), SNR = п = (P/hv)/2B, where В is the receiver bandwidth, P is the
optical power (W), and п is the average number of photons received in a time interval
1/2B, which is regarded as the resolution time of the system. If SNRo is the minimum
allowed signal-to-noise ratio, the receiver sensitivity becomes по = SNRo photons рег
receiver resolution time, or its corresponding power

P,. = hyip (2B). (25.2-14)
This is identical to (25.2-1) for the power sensitivity of an ideal digital receiver if the
resolution time of the analog system 1/2B is equated with the bit time of the digital
system 1/ Во.

Because of the equivalence between (25.2-14) and (25.2-1), and because of the
applicability of the power budget equation (25.2-3) to analog systems as well as digital
ones, the [Bo relations set forth earlier for the ideal binary digital system are also
applicable for the analog system, with By replaced by 2B, provided that the acceptable
performance level of the analog system is SNRp = 10. As an example, a 1-km fiber
link capable of transmitting digital data at a rate of 2 Gb/s with a BER not exceeding
10-9 can also be used to transmit analog data of bandwidth 1 GHz with a signal-to-
noise ratio of at least 10.

In analog systems, however, the required signal-to-noise ratio is usually far greater
than 10, in which case the receiver sensitivity must be far greater than 10 photons per
receiver resolution time. For high-quality audio and video signals, for example, a 60-dB
signal-to-noise ratio is often required. This corresponds to SNRp = 10°, or то = 10°
photons per resolution time. Certain other design considerations are also particularly
important in analog systems. For example, nonlinear behavior in the light source and
photodetector result in additional signal degradation and restrict the dynamic range of
the transmitted waveforms.

D. Attenuation and Dispersion Compensation and Management
Attenuation Compensation

The performance of an attenuation-limited optical fiber communication system may
be significantly enhanced by making use of optical fiber amplifiers placed at judicious

1254 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
locations within the fiber link, as illustrated in Fig. 25.2-14. Amplifiers elevate the
diminished optical power, so that the received power can remain above the receiver
sensitivity for far greater fiber lengths. Indeed, optical fiber amplifiers are invaluable
components in long-haul links, as exemplified by the enhanced performance offered by
System ©) in Fig. 25.2-4. The extent to which amplification can be used is ultimately
limited by the noise introduced by the amplifiers themselves. However, before this limit
is reached, dispersion often takes over and the system becomes dispersion-limited.
Dispersion compensation is therefore an invaluable adjunct in long-haul optical fiber
communication systems that make use of optical amplifiers.
—— р» № OA OA ed
Fiber Fiber Fiber
Е
© ии и
Е
Figure 25.2-14 Compensation of attenuation by use of optical fiber amplifiers.
Dispersion Compensation
The pulse spreading introduced by propagation through an optical fiber of length Г, and
dispersion coefficient Г)» may be reversed by making use of an auxiliary fiber, called
a dispersion-compensating fiber (DCF), with dispersion coefficient D\ of opposite
sign and length L’ selected such that the magnitudes of the dispersion introduced by
the two fibers are equal, 1.е.,
D\L' = —DL. (25.2-15)
The pulse spreading and compression introduced by an alternating sequence of such
fibers is illustrated in Fig. 25.2-15. The compensating fiber is often relatively short
so its dispersion coefficient must be high. Since dispersion in conventional fibers is
positive for wavelengths above 1310 nm, the dispersion-compensating fiber must have
negative dispersion in this band. This can be achieved by employing dispersion-shifted
fibers (DSFs).
Dy)
[<< |. —— te) he 5. — te >
= | | !
ЗЕ | |
ь я | I _--
Я а, DL БЕ |
А ~ 1 | р | Z
| | |
| р | |
yg | |
я | | | |
> 1 | | .
Ф | | | | --7
4 \ 1
2 | | |
А | | | |
<
Figure 25.2-15 Dispersion compensation implemented by fiber segments of opposite dispersion.
Other optical components may be used in place of DCFs. As described in Sec. 23.2,
the propagation of an optical pulse through a dispersive medium is equivalent to a
quadratic chirp filter, which is a phase-only filter with a phase proportional to the
square of the frequency. A fiber of length Г, and dispersion coefficient Г)» behaves
as a quadratic chirp filter with chirp coefficient 6 = D)L. The effect of this filter

25.2 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 1255
may be completely eliminated by making use of an inverse compensation filter —
another quadratic chirp filter with a chirp coefficient of equal magnitude and opposite
sign, В = —b. The dispersion-compensating fiber plays such a role, but other optical
components, such as gratings and interferometers, may also be used for this purpose
(see Sec. 23.2).

The compensation filter may be placed at the transmitter end of the link, thus pre-
compensating the dispersion that is subsequently introduced by the fiber. Alterna-
tively, it may be placed at the receiver end, thus postcompensating the broadened
pulses immediately before detection. More commonly, multiple compensation filters
are placed periodically within the link, providing distributed compensation. Under
linear propagation conditions, the actual locations of the compensation filters are not
important. However, to avert deleterious nonlinear effects, compensation filters are
often placed at locations within the fiber that obviate the presence of short pulses over
extended distances.

Broadband Dispersion Compensation: Dispersion Management

For broadband communication systems, such as those that make use of wavelength-
division multiplexing (WDM), the condition for dispersion compensation provided in
(25.2-15) must be satisfied at all wavelengths within the spectral band; i.e., the error
ех = Рог — D\L' must be zero everywhere. Since the dispersion coefficients are
wavelength dependent, this condition is tricky to satisfy. Figure 25.2-16 illustrates a
situation for which ел = 0 at wavelength А! in the middle of the band, where the com-
pensation is perfect. However, the positive value of e, at wavelength Az corresponds
to net positive dispersion while the negative value of e, at wavelength Аз corresponds
to net negative dispersion.

Yet, if both Дл and D\ are approximately linear functions of Л with the same slope,
and if e, = 0 at the central wavelength ;, then e, = 0 everywhere. The design of
dispersion-compensating filters with appropriate values of the dispersion coefficient
and slope of its wavelength dependence, is known as dispersion management. This
technique made possible the dramatic increase in system capacity offered by WDM, as
evidenced by System (7) in Fig. 25.2-4.

(T=. Dy
_ » лм
Е р
я А
& А!
я -
a 0 a
5 са
Е Lo xO,
5 ^ - PAO № ^
Figure 25.2-16 Perfect dispersion compensation at Л1; and imperfect dispersion compensation,
with net positive and negative dispersion at А> and Аз, respectively. The error ех vanishes if the
slopes of О» and Г) are equal.
Electronic Dispersion Compensation
More recently, advances in digital signal processing and error control coding have
made electronic dispersion compensation possible and have emerged as critical el-
ements of optical fiber communication systems. This is particularly true for digital

1256  CHAPTER25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

coherent systems, which employ WDM and rely on optimized digital coding and elec-
tronic signal processing rather than on dispersion-compensation sections. Digital co-
herent communications, shown as System @) in Fig. 25.2-4, is discussed in Sec. 25.4.
E. Soliton Optical Communications

The ultimate in dispersion compensation occurs naturally in optical solitons. These
non-spreading pulses have an intensity that is sufficiently high so that the nonlinear
optical properties of the fiber play a principal role in their formation. As described in
Sec. 23.5B, optical solitons are pulses for which nonlinear dispersion (the dependence
of the phase velocity on the intensity via the optical Kerr effect) completely com-
pensates linear chromatic dispersion — the net result is that the pulse travels without
altering its width or shape. Moreover, the gain provided by a fiber amplifier can be
used to compensate for fiber attenuation so the pulse can maintain its peak intensity
and continue to travel as a soliton.

As expressed in (23.5-13), for a pulse of width то, peak intensity Го, and free-space
wavelength Ло at its central frequency, the condition for soliton formation is

MW
р = a (25.2-16)
Xo То Soliton Condition
where 7 is the optical Kerr coefficient and — 8” = (\2/27c,) D) is proportional to the
dispersion coefficient Л)». The intensity profile of the soliton is described by I(t) =
То sech?(t/79), which is a bell-shaped function with a FWHM of 1.76 то.

In a digital optical communication system, a soliton whose width 79 is much smaller
than the bit interval T represents state “1”, while state “0” is represented by the absence
of a soliton. This is necessarily a return-to-zero (RZ) modulation format (Fig. 25.3-4).
Soliton communication systems are neither attenuation-limited nor dispersion-limited.
Rather, they are limited by nonlinear intersymbol interference that results from the
nonlinear interaction between the tails of solitons that represent neighboring bits. When
two identical solitons separated by the bit interval T travel a sufficiently long distance
through the same fiber, they eventually collapse and merge into a single pulse that
subsequently splits again into the original two solitons. In accordance with (23.5-32),
this process is repeated periodically with period

Ly = re"! 20, (25.2-17)
where r = Т/то is the ratio of the separation to the soliton width, and 220 =
—то/В" = Эпсото / А? О» is the fiber dispersion distance.

The period Г» increases exponentially with the ratio т. If r >> 1, 1e., if the bit
interval T is much greater than the soliton width то, then L,, can be made much longer
than 20. If the fiber length Г, is much smaller than L,, then the interaction between
neighboring bits is minimal. For a fixed ratio r, the condition L < L, may be written
in terms of the bit rate Во = 1/T as

5 2 Co ег/ 2
ГВ < YD," (25.2-18)
This places a limit on the ultimate distances and transmission rates that are permitted.
It is important to note that the dispersion characteristics of existing fiber links are
often not well-suited to optical-soliton systems so the technology has not been avidly
pursued since the mid-1990s, as indicated by System ©) in Fig. 25.2-4.

25.3 MODULATION AND MULTIPLEXING 1257
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 25.2-1. Soliton Optical-Fiber Communication System. А soliton communi-
cation system transmits data at 10 Gb/s through a single-mode dispersion-shifted fiber at Ло = 1550
nm using 10-ps (FWHM) soliton pulses. At this wavelength, the dispersion coefficient D,= 1 ps/km-
nm and the nonlinear refractive index np = 2.6 x 10-20 m?/W. The fiber effective cross-sectional
area is Ас = 60 рш?. We proceed to determine the source optical power and the maximum length
of the link. The 10-ps FWHM pulse width corresponds to a time constant то = 10/1.76 = 5.7 ps. To
satisfy the soliton condition (25.2-16), the peak intensity is Го = 3.75 x 108 W/m?, corresponding
to a peak power [Ан = 22.5 mW, which must be delivered by the source. The fiber dispersion
distance 220 = (27c,/X?)73/D) = 25 km. Since the bit interval T = 1/Вь = 100 ps, the ratio
т = Т/ю = 17.6, and the interaction period provided in (25.2-17) is Г» = 2.1 x 10*z9. The
fiber length must be much shorter than this length. In this example, (25.2-18) provides LB? < 26
m-Tb?/s?.
ПОНИ

25.3 MODULATION AND MULTIPLEXING
A. Modulation
One way of classifying an optical communication system is in terms of the particular
optical variable (intensity, frequency, or phase) that is modulated by the signal to be
transmitted. Modulation takes two principal forms: field modulation and intensity mod-
ulation. Once the modulation variable is chosen, any of the conventional modulation
formats (analog, pulse, or digital) can be implemented.
Field modulation. The field of a monochromatic optical wave serves as a sinusoidal
carrier of very high frequency (e.g., 200 THz at А, = 1500 nm). As a means of
carrying information, amplitude modulation (AM), phase modulation (PM), and fre-
quency modulation (FM) rely on modulation of the amplitude, phase, and frequency
of the field, respectively, in proportionality to the signal (Fig. 25.3-1). Because of the
high frequency of the optical carrier, a very wide spectral band is available for the
modulation so that a great deal of information can be carried.
cll lin
Signal

ими И Рючге 25.3-1 Amplitude modu-

> —| Modulator FM lation (AM) and frequency modula-

Optical field | | | i | и | | : tion (FM) of the optical field.

'

Though modulation of the optical field is an obvious extension of conventional га-
diowave and microwave communication techniques to the optical band, it is somewhat
difficult to implement for several reasons:

= It requires a source whose amplitude, frequency, and phase are stable and free of

fluctuations, e.g., a highly coherent laser.

= Direct modulation of the phase or frequency of a laser is not straightforward; an

external modulator that makes use of the electro-optic effect, for example, may
be required.

= Because of the assumed high degree of coherence of the source, the use of single-

mode fibers is often required; multimode fibers may engender substantial modal
noise unless special measures are taken to separate the modes by use of multi-
plexers/demultiplexers.

1258 — СНАРТЕА25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

= A mechanism for monitoring and controlling the polarization of the field is re-

quired unless a polarization-maintaining fiber is employed.

= The receiver must be capable of measuring the magnitude and phase of the optical

field; this is often accomplished by making use of a heterodyne or homodyne
detection system.

Because of the requirement of a coherent field, optical communication systems that
make use of field modulation are termed coherent communication systems. These
systems are discussed in Sec. 25.4.

Intensity modulation. In an intensity modulation (IM) system, the optical intensity
(or power) is imparted to the signal, or a coded version thereof, in a proportional
manner, as illustrated in Fig. 25.3-2. The majority of commercial optical fiber com-
munication systems in current use employ intensity modulation because of its relative
simplicity and low cost. The optical power of an LED or laser-diode source may be
modulated by simply varying the injected drive current. The fiber may be single-mode
or multimode. The received optical power impinges on a p—i—n photodiode or ап
avalanche photodiode (APD) in what is called a direct-detection receiver. The high-
frequency optical field oscillations play no role in the modulation and demodulation
processes; it is the optical power that is modulated at the transmitter and demodulated
at the receiver. Nevertheless, as we shall see in Sec. 25.3C, the wavelength of the light
can serve as a marker that allows many different signals to travel through a single
optical link via a process known as wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM).
Signal IM
у Figure 25.3-2 Intensity modula-
Optical intensity t tion (IM).
1
Digital modulation. Ап analog signal may be converted into a digital signal by
periodically sampling it at an appropriate rate. The resulting samples are then quantized
to a discrete finite number of levels, each of which is binary coded and transmitted in
the form of a sequence of binary bits, “1’s’” and “0’s”, represented by pulses transmitted
within the time interval between two adjacent samples (Fig. 25.3-3). This scheme is
known as pulse code modulation (PCM).
> | Signal
= = (bandwidth 4 kHz)
2 : : : : samples
ra : : : : : (8000/5)
N = В = : :
| 15.625 8 | 125 ps | ; ot
Poe я” | PCM signal
64 kbits/s
TOOLOTIONOIIOIIOINOIOIOIONLOOIOILN. 2
Figure 25.3-3 An example of pulse code modulation (PCM). A 4-kHz voice signal is sampled at
arate of 8 x 103 samples per second. Each sample is quantized to 28 = 256 levels and represented
by 8 bits. The original analog signal is thus converted into a sequence of bits transmitted at a rate of
64 kb/s.

25.3 MODULATION AND MULTIPLEXING 1259

In a binary coding system such as that illustrated above, the two states of each
bit may be represented by two values of the optical amplitude, phase, or frequency,
in which case the modulation scheme is known as amplitude shift keying (ASK),
frequency shift keying (FSK), and phase shift keying (PSK), respectively. ASK
modulation is also known as ON-OFF keying (OOK) when each bit is represented by
the presence or absence of a pulse of light. These modulation schemes are illustrated in
Fig. 25.3-4. Systems based on optical intensity modulation typically use OOK. How-
ever, it is also possible to modulate the optical intensity with a harmonic function that
serves as a subcarrier whose frequency or phase is modulated using FSK or PSK. Field
modulation with PSK is widely used in wireless networking over short distances, e.g.
in wireless local area networks (WLANs), in radio frequency identification (RFID),
and in Bluetooth technology.

1 Oo 1 1 0, ook
1 0 1 1 0 ert one — Peers (NRZ)
(a) Optical intensity OOK
ee Hi pn. ox
' Poo EE
Signal й FSK
» 1 и . ; 0 = in — ina wt ;
ААА, —1 LAMAN _ рэк
t VV WV WV WY 7
Figure 25.3-4 Examples of the binary modulation of light: (а) ON-OFF keying intensity
modulation (OOK/IM); (b) frequency shift keying (FSK) and phase shift keying (PSK) field
modulation.

Advances in high-speed electronics and digital signal processing have enabled mul-
tilevel coding, which offers higher spectral efficiency [(b/s)/Hz] than binary cod-
ing. In such systems, each pulse (symbol slot) represents multiple bits. As an exam-
ple, in binary PSK (BPSK), the phase can assume only two values (0,7), represent-
ing one bit, whereas in quaternary (or quadrature) PSK (QPSK), four phase values
(0, 7/2, 7, 37/2) serve to encode two bits, as depicted in the complex-plane diagram
depicted in Fig. 25.3-5, which is also called the quadrature diagram. QPSK transmits
the same information at half the symbol rate of BPSK. For higher-order PSK, data
are coded by a constellation of points in the quadrature diagram that are separated
by equal angles. Other variations of PSK include differential PSK (where it is the
data change, rather than the data, that sets the phase. The differential approach avoids
any ambiguity that might be imparted by an unintended rotation of the constellation
introduced in the transmission channel. Differential QPSK is denoted DQPSK.

Q Q Q Figure 25.3-5 Constellations for BPSK (1
и | on a | bit), QPSK (2 bits; also called 4-QAM), and
/ ‘ f ‘ i wre \ 8-QAM (4 bits). The symbols I and Q denote
\ it ‘, jt , ole ГГ the in-phase and quadrature components of
| Е вия the complex amplitude, which are the real and
imaginary components, respectively.
BPSK QPSK 8-QAM

Combined amplitude and phase shift keying permits a larger number of bits per
symbol to be attained, as may be understood from the constellations of points in
the complex plane shown in Fig. 25.3-5. The terminology quadrature amplitude
modulation (QAM) is used to indicate that each of the quadratures of the optical field

1260  CHAPTER25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
may assume multiple amplitudes. Thus, 4-QAM is the same as QPSK since each of
the two quadratures has two values of the amplitude. The constellation of the 8-QAM
system, which is a 4-bit system, is also provided in Fig. 25.3-5. Constellations for
16-QAM, and so on, are constructed in the same manner.
B. Multiplexing
Multiplexing enables the transmission and retrieval of more than one signal through
the same communication link, as illustrated in Fig. 25.3-6. This is accomplished by
marking each signal with a distinct physical label or a code that may be identified
at the receiver. We begin this section with a discussion of electronic multiplexing,
which comprises three standard schemes: frequency-division multiplexing (FDM),
time-division multiplexing (TDM), and code-division multiplexing (CDM).
51 51 .
= 52 >. Figure 25.3-6 Transmission of № signals
a a through the same channel by use of a multi-
Si + S24. + Sy plexer (MUX) and a demultiplexer (DMUX).
Sn Sn
Frequency-division multiplexing (FDM). In FDM, carriers of distinct frequencies
are modulated by a collection of signals. At the receiver, the individual signals are
identified by making use of filters tuned to the carrier frequencies, as illustrated in
Fig. 25.3-7(a).
Signal 1 2 ... N Signal1 2... N12 ++. N12 .++ М
ар ... fy _ frequency Frame 1 | Frame 2 | Frame3 | time
(a) ЕРМ (b) TDM
Figure 25.3-7 (а) In frequency-division multiplexing (FDM), a spectral band centered about а
distinct frequency is allocated to each signal. (6) In time-division multiplexing, a sequence of time
slots is allocated to each signal. The time slots of different signals are interleaved.
Time-division multiplexing (TDM). In TDM, data are transmitted in a sequence of
time frames, each with a set of time slots allocated to bits or bytes of the different sig-
nals, as illustrated in Fig. 25.3-7(b). These bits must be synchronized to the same clock.
At the receiver, each signal is identified by its time-slot location within the frame. An
example of a hierarchical TDM system is the T-system illustrated in Fig. 25.3-8.
4 kb/s
Tl т тз T4
1.544 274.176
6.312 44.736
Mb/s Mb/s МЫ Mb/s
x24 x4 x7 x6

Figure 25.3-8 Hierarchy of the T-system originally developed by the Bell telephone system for
transmitting voice signals via time-division multiplexing. A set of 24 4-kb/s signals are multiplexed
by a time-division multiplexer that generates a T1 composite signal at 1.544 Mb/s. Four such signals
are multiplexed to generate a T2 signal, and so on, as illustrated in the figure.

25.3 MODULATION AND MULTIPLEXING 1261
Code-division multiplexing (CDM). In CDM, each signal is assigned an address
code (or key) in the form of a unique function of time defined within the bit period.
The code can be a sequence of one/zero bits generated at a rate far higher than that of
the original data. Codes of different signals must be uncorrelated (orthogonal) so that
they can be separated at the receiver by use of a correlator. In the particular encoding
scheme illustrated in Fig. 25.3-9, each bit “1” of the original data is replaced with the
code sequence. Each receiver correlates its own code with that of the received signal,
thereby locking it only to those bits associated with its own code and permitting it to
disregard all other bits.
Address | |
Code | |
| И
ie | 1 0 1 oo Figure 25.3-9 An example of
| | | | ¢ CDM encoding.
Encoded | |
signal | | \ | Е”
р р | | | t
Electronic versus optical multiplexing. As portrayed in Fig. 25.3-10, multiplexing
may be electronic or optical. In electronic multiplexing, as discussed above, the sig-
nals are multiplexed via ЕОМ, TDM, or CDM to generate a composite electronic signal
that is used to modulate the light source via any of the optical modulation schemes
discussed in Sec. 25.3A. For example, an FDM electronic signal may be generated
by making use of a set of carrier frequencies, called “subcarriers,” to modulate the
intensity of the light source (IM). At the receiver, the light is detected and the demulti-
plexing is carried out by using electronic filters. In another example, a TDM electronic
signal such as the T4 signal shown in Fig. 25.3-8 intensity modulates the light source;
demultiplexing of the detected signal is accomplished electronically.
Frequency Time Code Wavelength Space
Figure 25.3-10 (a) Electronic
multiplexing. (b) Optical multiplex-
ing.
(a) (b)

In optical multiplexing, on the other hand, the labels distinguishing the multiplexed
signals are optical in nature. In optical FDM, for example, a collection of optical fre-
quencies are used as the carriers of the various signals. These frequencies are separated
at the receiver by means of optical filters. When the carrier frequencies in optical
FDM are sufficiently widely spaced (say, greater than 20 GHz), this form of optical
FDM has come to be called wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM), as discussed
in Sec. 25.3C. Systems employing WDM are extensively used since they allow the
capacity of an existing fiber network to be expanded without the necessity of deploying
additional fiber. Another form of optical multiplexing is space-division multiplexing
(SDM), discussed in Sec. 25.3D, in which the labels that distinguish the multiplexed
signals are associated with the spatial modes of optical fibers, including polarization
modes.

1262 — CHAPTER25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
C. Wavelength-Division Multiplexing
A wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) system makes use of a collection of
light sources of different wavelengths, each of which is intensity modulated by a
different electrical signal. The modulated light beams are combined and launched into
a fiber using an optical multiplexer (OMUX). Demultiplexing is implemented at the
receiver with the help of an optical demultiplexer (OQDMUX), which serves to separate
the different wavelengths and direct them to different detectors. Optical multiplexers
and demultiplexers were described in Sec. 24.2A. The electrical signal associated with
each wavelength is often an electronically multiplexed set of other signals, so that
electronic demultiplexing is required at the receiver. The overall system schematic of
such a configuration is illustrated in Fig. 25.3-11.
Ome Aj Cee oAy
3 Ome Л i О | 5 о Л
so ME М ee 3
В — их ЛЬ Ag e+ Aw U — Е
сы р i AN Dm Xm Ам
Figure 25.3-11  Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM). A set of electronically multiplexed
data-carrying signals are converted into an optical signal by modulating an optical source of a
particular wavelength (E/O). Collections of such modulated optical sources at different wavelengths
are optically multiplexed (OQMUX) and launched into a single optical fiber. At the receiver end, the
signals are optically demultiplexed (QODMUX). The optical signal at each wavelength is converted
into an electrical signal by use of a detector/demodulator (O/E) and then electronically demultiplexed.
The spectral bands used in modern optical fiber communication systems are dis-
played in Fig. 25.3-12. WDM systems can make use of any combination of wave-
lengths within these bands. The spacing between the wavelengths of the different
channels must be greater than the spectral widths of the modulated light in each chan-
nel, which are determined by the linewidths of the light sources as well as by the
bandwidths of the data carried by the channels. The channel spacing must also be
large enough to permit optical multiplexing and demultiplexing with minimal crosstalk
among channels.
100 GHz
40 WDM 111 Thee
channels | ИИ
05. Frequency (THz) 230 220 210 180
| 7
304 <
8 35 пт
203
2
5 _ М
3 0.2
о
Zou З ° $ Fig Sloe te YU
5 = ы = pa ba i хе
=
1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700
Wavelength Ло (nm) —
Figure 25.3-12 A 40-channel DWDM system with channel spacings of 100 GHz in the С spectral
band. The curve represents the attenuation coefficient (dB/km) of silica-glass fibers with suppressed
OH absorption. Fiber attenuation is minimized in the wavelength region corresponding to the C band.
The bands commonly used in WDM systems are denoted O = Original, E = Extended, S = Short,
C = Conventional, L = Long, and U = Ultra-long, as detailed in Fig. 25.1-2.

25.3 MODULATION AND MULTIPLEXING 1263
WDM systems are classified into two categories, coarse and dense, depending on the
number of channels and the channel spacing.

= Coarse WDM (CWDM) systems use а few channels with widely spaced wave-

lengths (20 nm or more). They are typically used in short-range communica-
tions and do not make use of amplification. An example is a system with two
wavelengths, one at 1310 nm and another at 1550 nm. CWDM is used in cable
television networks, where different wavelengths are used for the downstream and
upstream signals. The Ethernet LX-4 physical layer standard provides another
example in which four wavelengths near 1310 nm are used, each carrying a
3.125-Gb/s data stream. The standardization of 100G and 400G ethernet is upon
us. Metropolitan networks employ CWDM systems with a 20-nm wavelength
spacing.

= Dense WDM (DWDM) systems have a large number of channels (generally more

than 16) with closely spaced wavelengths. Such systems are used in long-haul
transmission and often make use of amplification. DWDM tends to be used at
a higher level (and at higher data rates) in the communications hierarchy, for
example, on the internet backbone. Implementation requires the use of precision
lasers to prevent wavelength drift. At a wavelength of 1550 nm in the C-band, for
example, a frequency spacing of Av = 200 GHz corresponds to a wavelength
spacing АЛ = (Л? /с,)Ди = 1.6 nm. DWDM systems use channel spacings as
small as 50 GHz, or sometimes even 20 GHz, corresponding to wavelength spac-
ings of 0.4 nm and 0.16 nm, respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 25.3-12, the width
of the C-band is 35 nm, or approximately 4.4 THz. This can hold 40 channels with
a 100-GHz (0.8 nm) spacing. More channels may be accommodated by expanding
beyond the C-band and reducing the channel spacing. As an example, making use
of the C+L-bands, whose combined width 15 = 9 THz, and channel spacings of
20.3 GHz, will accommodate 441 channels.

WDM for wideband multimode fibers at 800-900 nm accommodates short-haul
applications such as data communications at rates exceeding 100 Gb/s. The MMFs use
GRIN profiles optimized to reduce modal and chromatic dispersion, thereby doubling
the 10 Gb/s rate of the OM4 fiber. VCSELs with few emission lines in the 800-900-пт
band are used as sources for few-channel WDM systems.

D. Space-Division Multiplexing

The data rate carried by a fiber-optic cable may be increased by making use of a fiber
bundle (FB) within the same cable or by making use of a multicore fiber (MCF)
comprising multiple, well-separated cores within the same fiber cladding, each pro-
viding an independent communication channel [Fig. 25.3-13(a)]. Cables can contain
tens or hundreds of fibers. However, such configurations require multiple systems
for transmission, amplification, and reception, as well as multiple splices that require
a great deal of mechanical precision in the event of a cable break. Moreover, they

typically need to be deployed from scratch.
Figure 25.3-13 (а) Multiple commu-
nication channels in a fiber bundle (FB)
(С) or in a multicore fiber (MCF) with well-
©) (>) separated cores. (b) Space-division mul-
^ 7 ^ tiplexing (SDM) using spatial modes of
COC) a multimode fiber (MMF) or modes of a

FB MCF MME MCF MCF with coupled cores.
(a) (b)

1264 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

It is worth considering whether a more compact configuration might be envisioned
while reducing the downside. It turns out that data rates can indeed be increased by
implementing space-division multiplexing (SDM) using either the spatial modes of
one multimode fiber (MMF) or the coupled-core modes of a multicore fiber (MCF)
[Fig. 25.3-13(b)]. The spatial modes of a MMF can provide independent communica-
tion channels, but implementing such a system requires the use of multiplexing and
demultiplexing since the modes occupy a common physical volume. Similarly, a MCF
whose cores are in close physical proximity can be used for data transmission, but this
too requires the use of multiplexing and demultiplexing since the set of coupled cores
support supermodes that occupy a common region of space. We proceed to discuss the
implementation of SDM in a multimode fiber.

SDM in Multimode Fibers
As described in Sec. 10.2A, a step-index MMF of core radius а and numerical aperture
NA has М = $V? modes, where М = (27a/A,) NA is the fiber V parameter. As is
evident from Fig. 10.2-5, a fiber with V = 10 supports approximately 50 modes. The
optical field is generally expressed as a weighted superposition of these modes
M
U(r, $, =) = So ag ug(r, 6) е №, (25.3-1)
q=1
where aq, В, and u,(r, Ф) are, respectively, the complex amplitude, propagation con-
stant, and transverse spatial distribution of the qth mode. For simplicity, we use the
integer 4 = 1,2,..., М in lieu of the mode double indices (1, т). The amplitudes
{aq}, which carry the transmitted information in a SDM system, are imparted to the
MMF by a multiplexer at the transmitter (z = 0) and extracted from the total received
optical field by a demultiplexer at the receiver terminus (z = L), as illustrated in
Fig. 25.3-14.
_SMFs MMF SMEs _
1 о 4 @:
= 1 2 3 M =
2 —=1® 8] ? . i) ()) OF OP
| му bee. -& ae:
U

M С С @
Figure 25.3-14 Space-division multiplexing (SDM) in a multimode fiber (MMF) using an optical
multiplexer (OMUX) and an optical demultiplexer (ODMUX). The signals on M single-mode optical
fibers (SMFs) are multiplexed into М modes of the MMF.

Since the modes are orthonormal, 1.е., м (т, Ф) ug (г, 6) rdrd@ = дад’, the am-
plitudes of the individual modes may be calculated from the total field at z = Г by use
of the projections (see Appendix C)

age Ih = Ш 0* (г, b, L) иа(г, Ф) тагаф. (25.3-2)
Therefore, if the total optical field U(r, Ф, L) were measured at the terminus, in both Из
magnitude and phase, the complex amplitudes {a, } of the modes would be determined.
However, such a measurement requires a fast coherent wavefront sensor, which is not
available, so we resort to less direct approaches.

25.3 MODULATION AND MULTIPLEXING 1265
SDM multiplexers and demultiplexers. The optical multiplexer (OQMUX) and de-
multiplexer (QDMUX) for SDM may be implemented by selective optical couplers,
assisted by computational signal-processing tools, as described by the following ex-
amples:
= Mode conversion. An optical system that implements the OMUX depicted in
Fig. 25.3-14 converts the incoming SMF optical beams, all of which have the
spatial profile of the fundamental mode and amplitudes {a,}, into beams whose
spatial profiles are proportional to those of the MMF modes w,(r, Ф). As illus-
trated in Fig. 25.3-15(a), the beams are optically combined into a single beam
corresponding to the superposition in (25.3-1) and coupled into the MMF using
a single input coupler. Since each spatial profile is excited by only the matching
input profile, the modes of the MMF acquire amplitudes proportional to {a,}.
The key element of this multiplexer is the mode converter, which is implemented
by means a phase plate, a spatial light modulator, or a hologram (see Sec. 4.5).
Though it offers a didactic example, this type of multiplexer introduces high
optical loss and crosstalk.
= Multiple directional couplers with matching propagation constants. A direc-
tional coupler couples the mode of a SMF to a mode of a MMF if the propagation
constants are matched (see Sec. 9.4B), even if the modal spatial profiles differ. An
optical multiplexer/demultiplexer based on this principle may be implemented by
using a bank of directional couplers of different dimensions designed to selec-
tively launch a particular mode of the MMF for each of the incoming/outgoing
SMFs, as illustrated in Fig. 25.3-15(5).
= Single fused coupler. A single fiber coupler with М identical SMFs at its in-
put, and one MMF supporting М modes at its output, may be used as a multi-
plexer/demultiplexer. Each of the SMFs carries light with the profile of its funda-
mental mode, but is positioned in relation to the output MMF such that it excites
a small group of MMF modes in accordance with a coupling matrix. An example
of a fused coupler is the photonic lantern described in Sec. 10.2D and displayed
in Fig. 25.3-15(c). Since the fused coupler is reciprocal it can be used in reverse
as a demultiplexer. Each output SMF then receives light from a group of modes
of the MMF in accordance with another coupling matrix.
, ‘CO Me
м_ МЯТЫ ММЕ $МЕЗ
МС
(а) (Б) (с)
Figure 25.3-15 Optical multiplexer (ОМИХ) examples for space-division multiplexing (SDM).
(a) OMUX using mode converters (MC) and beam combining by means of beam splitters. (b) OMUX
using multiple directional couplers with propagation constants matched to the MMF modes. (c)
Photonic lantern OMUX. The multiplexers in (5) and (с) can be used in reverse as demultiplexers.

1266  CHAPTER25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

Crosstalk and MIMO systems. Since multiplexers and demultiplexers are not per-
fect, the complex amplitudes of the modes detected by the receivers do not have one-
to-one correspondences with those at the transmitter, and are instead described by
coupling matrices at both ends. Additional mode coupling is introduced by the fiber
itself as a result of slight variations along its length caused by fabrication errors or by
micro and macro fiber bending. Small distortions of the circular symmetry of the fiber
cross-section also result in coupling between the degenerate modes, which have equal
propagation constants under ideal conditions. Mode coupling is a challenging obstacle
to implementing SDM although it can be overcome.

In the absence of nonlinear optical effects, the modal amplitudes {b, } at the receiver
output are related to the modal amplitudes {a,} at the transmitter input by the linear
relation

M
bg = S— Copp, 9=12,...,М, (25.3-3)
p=1
where the Сар are the elements of an М x М coupling matrix. This matrix is in turn the
product of three matrices: the coupling matrix of the multiplexer, the modal coupling
matrix of the fiber, and the coupling matrix of the demultiplexer. While the multiplexer
and demultiplexer coupling matrices can be measured, the modal coupling matrix of
the fiber has intrinsic randomness and can only be described statistically. Moreover,
elements of the overall coupling matrix are frequency-dependent because of modal and
material dispersion, so that they represent a dynamical system that includes differential
modal delay. Nevertheless, these effects may be compensated by making use of signal-
processing tools similar to those employed in wireless systems, which are subject
to multiple paths among transmitters and receivers, and are known as multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) systems.
SDM in multicore fibers. MCF SDM is implemented by making use of a similar
approach. If each of the cores supports a few modes, then the system may be described
in terms of a matrix representing a combination of intra-core mode coupling and inter-
core coupling. For strong core coupling, the overall system may be also be described
in terms of supermodes (see Sec. 10.2D).
25.4 COHERENT OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS

Coherent optical communication systems make use of field modulation (amplitude,
phase, or frequency) rather than intensity modulation. They employ coherent light
sources, single-mode or multimode fibers, and heterodyne or homodyne optical re-
ceivers. Coherent optical fiber communication systems were initially pursued in the
late 1980s because of their superior sensitivity but were largely bypassed in the early
1990s because of the invention of the erbium-doped fiber amplifier, which enabled the
sensitivity of direct-detection systems to come within a few dB of that of coherent
systems.

The resurgence of interest in coherent optical fiber systems, fostered by advances
in high-speed electronics and digital signal processing, has led to increased spectral
efficiency and enhanced transmission capacity. We proceed to examine the principles
of operation of such systems and to compare their performance with that of direct-
detection systems. We also touch on the requirements for components employed in
coherent systems. Coherent systems also find application in free-space optical com-
munications.

25.4 COHERENT OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS 1267

As discussed in Sec. 19.1B, photodetectors are responsive to the photon flux and,
as such, are insensitive to optical phase. Nevertheless, it is possible to measure the
complex amplitude (both magnitude and phase) of a signal optical field by mixing it
with a coherent reference optical field of stable phase, called a local oscillator (LO).
As illustrated in Fig. 25.4-1, the two waves are superposed (mixed) before impinging
on the photodetector. As a consequence of interference of the two fields, information
pertaining to both the amplitude and phase of the signal field is registered in the
detected electric current.

This detection technique is known as coherent detection, in contrast to direct de-
tection (DD), which was considered earlier in this chapter. Coherent optical detection
is also called optical mixing, photomixing, or light beating (see Sec. 2.6B). The
coherent optical receiver is the optical equivalent of the superheterodyne radio receiver.
When the signal and local-oscillator waves have different frequencies (и. and wy,
respectively), the technique is called optical heterodyning whereas it is referred to
as optical homodyning when w,; = wr.

Signal Signal + Figure 25.4-1 Coherent optical detection.
> as А, A signal wave of frequency w, is mixed
т > with a local oscillator wave of frequency wy,
— SNe т using (a) a beamsplitter, or (5) an optical
Local if Local uu coupler. The detector photocurrent varies at
oscillator oscillator the difference frequency шт = м; — wy.
(а) (b)
Heterodyne Receiver
Let €, = Re{E, exp(jwst)} be the signal optical field, with Е. = |E,|exp(jys) its
complex amplitude and w, its angular frequency. The magnitude | F,| (or the phase vy.)
is modulated by the signal at a rate much slower than that of w,. The local oscillator
field is similarly described by &г, Ez, wz, and фг. The two fields are mixed using
a beamsplitter or an optical coupler, as depicted in Fig. 25.4-1, so that the total field
is the sum of the constituent fields: € = €, + € ,. If the incident fields are perfectly
parallel plane waves and have the same polarization, the spatial dependence need not
be carried along in the calculations. Taking the absolute square of the sum of the two
complex waves then leads to

|e! + Еремы? = |B)? + |Ep/? + 2|Es||Ep| cos(wyt + ys, — yr), (25.4-1)
where wy = Ws — wz is the difference frequency, also called the intermediate fre-
quency. Since the intensities J,, Гр, and Г are proportional to the absolute-squared
values of the complex amplitudes, we arrive at
which accords with (2.6-12). From a photon-optics point of view, this process can be
understood in terms of the detection of polychromatic (two-frequency) photons (see
Prob. 13.1-11).

The optical power P at the photodetector is the integral of the intensity over the
detector area, so that

P =Р, + Pr + 2\ Р,РЬ cos(wrt + Ys — px), (25.4-3)
where P, and Рг are the powers of the signal and the LO beams, respectively. Mis-
alignment between the directions of the two waves washes out the interference term

1268 — СНАРТЕА25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

[the third term of (25.4-3)], since the phase y, — фг then varies sinusoidally with
position across the area of the detector. As is readily understood from Fig. 2.5-4,
this undesirable result can be avoided by keeping the angle 9 between the wavefronts
sufficiently small, such that 6 < A/a, where a is the size of the photodetector aperture.

If the signal and local oscillator beams are sufficiently close in frequency, their
difference w; will be many orders of magnitude smaller than the individual frequencies
Ww, and wy. The superposed light is then quasi-monochromatic and the total photon flux
Ф = P/hi is proportional to the optical power, where 7 = W/2m and & = $(ws +
wy). In accordance with (19.1-4), the photocurrent 7 generated in a photodetector is
proportional to the incident photon flux ® via 1 = пеФ, where е is the electron charge
and 7 the detector quantum efficiency. The mean photocurrent is hence 7 = (ne/hV)P,
which provides

Photomixing

Current

Here 7, = neP,/hv andi, = neP,/hv are the photocurrents generated by the signal
and LO individually.

The local oscillator is usually made much stronger than the signal, in which case
the first term in (25.4-4) can be neglected. The second term is constant and the useful
information is carried by the third term, which oscillates at the difference frequency wy.
With knowledge of 77 and фт, the amplitude and phase of this term can be determined,
and 7, and y, estimated, from which the intensity and phase (and hence the complex
amplitude) of the measured optical signal can be inferred. The information-containing
signal variables 7, or y, are usually slowly varying functions of time in comparison
with wy, so they act as slow modulations of the amplitude and phase of the harmonic
function 2,\/7, cos(w;t — yr), respectively. The amplitude- and phase-modulated cur-
rent can be demodulated by drawing on the conventional techniques used in AM and
FM radio receivers.

Balanced Homodyne Receiver
The homodyne system is a special case of the heterodyne system for which w, =
wr and «г = 0. The demodulation process is different for homodyning than for
heterodyning, however. For the homodyne system, a phase-locked loop is used to lock
the phase of the LO so that gy; = 0, whereupon (25.4-4) yields
=, + 21 + 2V 1,11 COS Ps. (25.4-5)
A balanced homodyne receiver, also called a balanced mixer, is a coherent receiver
designed to cancel the first two terms of (25.4-5). As illustrated in Fig. 25.4-2, the
optical fields of the signal and LO are mixed at a beamsplitter (or directional coupler).
Figure 25.4-2 The balanced homodyne
receiver detects the intensity of the sum of
+ Signal + the signal and local oscillator fields in one
~K Nel i arm (+) and the intensity of their difference
> > in the other (—). The resulting photocurrents
т = S ЧИ т аге then subtracted electronically, yielding a
Local _ Local _ net current that contains the signal informa-
oscillator oscillator tion. (a) Beam-splitter implementation. (6)
(a) (b) Optical. . :
ptical-coupler implementation.

25.4 COHERENT OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS 1269

Since the phase difference between the waves at the two output ports of the beam-
splitter differs by a (see Sec. 2.5A), one output branch contains the sum of the two
fields whereas the other branch contains their difference. The detected currents 7, =
ts + tz + 2\/ 1581 COS Ys are then electronically subtracted, which gives rise to

1 = 4\/ 1.11 COS Ys. (25.4-6)
The balanced homodyne mixer thus exhibits two advantages over the heterodyne sys-
tem: (1) Random fluctuations in the intensity of the local oscillator [the second term
of (25.4-5)] are canceled; and (2) the information-carrying signal [the third term] is
multiplied by two.

A phase-diversity balanced homodyne receiver comprises a pair of balanced
homodyne receivers that use local oscillators with phases y, and yr, — 1/2, which
generate electric currents 7 = 4,/7,7, cos(ys — yr) and7 = 4,/7,7; sin(ys — фр),
respectively. With the phase-lock suppression of yz, the mixers thus provide the in-
phase and quadrature components of the complex field, I « ./7,cosy, and Q «
/ 1s Sin Ys, respectively.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Coherent Receivers
In comparison with their direct-detection counterparts, coherent receivers have the
following advantages:

и They are capable of measuring the complex optical field, including its phase and
frequency, thereby enabling field-modulation communication systems with their
attendant increase in spectral efficiency.

= By making use of a strong local oscillator field, coherent receivers offer inherently
noiseless conversion gain that effectively amplifies the signal above the circuit
noise, as will become apparent subsequently.

= Coherent receivers offer a 3-dB advantage in signal-to-noise ratio over even noise-
less direct-detection receivers, as will be shown shortly.

= Coherent receivers are insensitive to unwanted background light since the local
oscillator does not mix with it.

= Coherent receivers offer one of the few ways of attaining photon-noise-limited
detection in the infrared region of the spectrum, where background noise is preva-
lent.

= Access to the complex optical field permits the use of electronic equalization to
compensate for signal impairments introduced by the communication channel,
such as chromatic dispersion and polarization mode dispersion, which result in
pulse broadening in optical fibers (see Sec. 10.3B). Moreover, nonlinear distor-
tions introduced in fibers can be compensated by digital signal processing.

= The principal disadvantage of the coherent receiver centers on its more strin-
gent requirements. Coherent systems require a stable, low-noise source of narrow
bandwidth; a stable local oscillator; an optical mixer in which the superposed
fields must be precisely aligned; and circuitry for phase locking and ancillary
functions.

Coherent Communication Systems

The schematic diagram of a basic coherent optical fiber communication system that
makes use of phase modulation and a balanced homodyne receiver is displayed in
Fig. 25.4-3. An essential condition for proper mixing of the local oscillator and re-
ceived optical field is that they be locked in phase, parallel, and have the same polari-
zation. This places stringent requirements on the components of the system. The lasers
must be single-frequency and have minimal phase and intensity fluctuations. The local

1270 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
oscillator must be phase-locked to the received optical field by means of a phase-
locked loop that adaptively adjusts its phase and frequency. The fiber should generally
be single-mode (to avoid modal noise) and polarization-maintaining (or the receiver
should contain an adaptive polarization-compensation system).
Balanced
MZM mixer Phase
— Es Est Ex К | Amplifier detector
Laser Single-mode fiber Е и
Polarization = =X Signal
controller Е; Е
Signal | ] | Frequency
lock
Laser
Figure 25.4-3 Coherent optical fiber communication system. The signal is phase modulated using
a Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM). The balanced mixer uses a tunable РЕВ laser and a phase-
locked loop.
A more sophisticated optical fiber communication system is portrayed in Fig. 25.4-
4. This system relies on quadrature-PSK (QPSK or 4-QAM) coding (see Sec. 25.3A)
and a phase-diversity balanced homodyne receiver. At the transmitter (Tx), light from
a laser is split into two branches containing Mach—Zehnder phase modulators that can
introduce phase shifts of 0 or 7. The upper branch represents the in-phase component
I while the lower branch, which includes an additional phase shift of 7/2, represents
the quadrature component Q. The phase of the transmitted field can thus take on one of
four values (0, 7/2, 7, 37/2), representing two bits per symbol. At the receiver (Rx),
the laser serving as a local oscillator is split into two branches that feed two balanced
mixers. The phase of the Q branch is shifted by 7/2. The signals generated by the
upper and lower mixers are hence proportional to |Е+ + E,|? —|E, — E,|? and |Е. +
jE,|? — |Es — jE,|*, corresponding to detected currents proportional to cos py, and
sin Ys, respectively, so that the I and О (cosine and sine) components of the signal field
are recovered. The system employs a phase-locked loop (not shown) that maintains the
LO phase фг at zero.
I
i Q
Tx obs Rx Е, +
/ у 1 о cm ЛА
о om о - | Ex я ТТ
Coupler —
Е Es Es i ese
— С С] <}
Laser . © и > Газег JEL _
г р 9%. 65 1/2.
C v1 Es Coupler +
Qt
Figure 25.4-4 QPSK coherent optical fiber communication system. The transmitter (Tx) employs
two Mach-Zehnder modulators (MZMs) to phase modulate the in-phase (I) and quadrature (О)
components of the complex field. The receiver (Rx) uses two balanced homodyne mixers and a laser
local oscillator to recover I and Q.

25.4 COHERENT OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS 1271

A coherent optical fiber communication system implemented in the late 1980s typi-
cally operated at Л. = 1550 nm with a bit rate below 1 Gb/s. The vast strides made over
the years in high-speed electronics and digital signal processing, along with the use of
spectrally efficient coding, have led to bit rates that are now many orders of magnitude
greater. A system in current use might make use of 16-QAM or 64-QAM coding, a
per-channel bit rate of 100 Gb/s, and hundreds of channels across the C+L-bands to
yield an overall bit rate of tens of Tb/s (System ® in Fig. 25.2-4). Experiments have
been carried out that make use of more advanced coding, such as 2048-QAM, with the
potential of achieving far higher overall bit rates.
Performance of Analog Coherent Communication Systems
Heterodyne detection is useful whenever the phase of an optical field is to be measured.
It turns out that heterodyne detection is also useful for measuring optical intensity
because it provides a form of amplification when the local oscillator is strong. This
amplification is known as conversion gain since it converts some of the local-oscillator
power into gain for the signal, as will become apparent below. Coherent detection thus
offers an alternative to both optical amplification (Secs. 15.3 and 18.2) and avalanche-
photodiode gain (Sec. 19.4). Indeed, heterodyne detection exhibits a signal-to-noise
ratio advantage relative to direct detection, as we now demonstrate.

The mean photocurrent 7 generated in the photodiode of an optical receiver is ac-
companied by noise whose variance comprises two terms:

0? = 2аВ + o?, (25.4-7)
where B is the receiver bandwidth. The first term represents the photocurrent shot
noise [see (19.6-8)] while the second term represents current noise contributed by the
receiver circuitry [see Sec. 19.6C]. When heterodyning is used and the local oscillator
is sufficiently strong, such that 7, >> 7, and 2e7;,.B >> o?, the photomixing current
and receiver noise variance, set forth in (25.4-4) and (25.4-7), respectively, can be
approximately written as

ти, + 2/1, coslwrt + (ys — Yz)] (25.4-8a)
о? = 2€7,B. (25.4-8b)
In the case of amplitude modulation, the signal is represented by the RMS value of
the sinusoidal waveform in (25.4-8a), so the phase is of no significance. The electrical
signal power is therefore ть? = 27,7, while the noise power is 0? = 2е, В,
so the power signal-to-noise ratio can be written as
SNR = РЕ Is (25.4-9)
— 2etpB eB
Шт = 7/2Be is the mean number of photoelectrons observed in the receiver resolution
time T = 1/2B (as derived in Sec. 19.6A), then (25.4-9) becomes
SNR = 2m. (25.4-10)
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Heterodyne Receiver
The presence of the strong local oscillator has thus rendered the SNR independent of
both the magnitude of the LO and the presence of circuit noise. The conversion gain
has served to effectively amplify the signal above the circuit noise.

1272 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

By way of comparison, the SNR of a direct-detection photodiode receiver with the

same signal current 2, is given by (see Sec. 19.6)

72 2

z m

SNR = ——=—,, = ——; 25.4-11
2e7,B +02 той’ ( )

which accords with (19.6-40), where о? = (o,/2Be)? is the circuit-noise parameter
defined in (19.6-34). For large signal current or small circuit noise (т >> 07), the
direct-detection result in (25.4-11) reduces to SNR = т.

The principal advantage of the coherent-detection system is apparent. The hetero-
dyne system, with SNR = 2m, offers a factor of 2 (or 3-dB) advantage over the
direct-direction system. For weak light (or large circuit noise) the advantage is even
greater: the SNR of the direct-detection system is further reduced by circuit noise to
т /(1+07/m) , whereas the SNR of the heterodyne system remains at 27. Moreover,
an avalanche photodiode incorporated into a direct-detection system does not help
matters. When the APD gain is sufficiently large so that it overcomes circuit noise,
in accordance with (19.6-39) we obtain

SNR = т/Р, (25.4-12)
where РЁ is the APD excess noise factor (Ff > 1). Even a noiseless APD receiver
(Е = 1) provides a result that is a factor of 2 inferior to that of the heterodyne receiver.
Performance of Digital Coherent Communication Systems
We now proceed to examine in turn the performance and sensitivity of digital coherent
communication systems that makes use of amplitude and phase modulation.
ON-OFF keying (OOK) homodyne system. Consider an ON-OFF keying (OOK)
system that transmits data at a rate Bo b/s and uses a homodyne receiver. The logic
states “1” and “0” are represented by the presence and absence of the signal 7, during
the bit time Т = 1/Bo, respectively. Assuming that the local oscillator is strong, and
that y, = yy = 0 and wy = w, — wy = 0, the measured photocurrent exhibits the
following means /11,9 and variances Clo: as provided by (25.4-8a) and (25.4-8b):

mean ply 22 +2./%st,, variance о? = 2е В for state “1”

° . и (25.4-13)

mean jp © 2, variance оо = 2e7,B for state “0”.

The receiver bandwidth В = Bo/2 since the bit time T = 1/Bo is the sampling time
1/2B for a signal of bandwidth В. Figure 25.4-5(a) offers a graphical depiction of the
distance 1 — по in relation to the RMS noise о: = og = a for the OOK constellation
diagram.

The performance of a binary communication system under the Gaussian approxi-
mation was considered in Sec. 19.6E. As provided in (19.6-58) and (19.6-59), the bit
error rate is given by

BER = 3[1 — erf(Q/vV2)], (25.4-14)
where Q = (1 — Mo) /(o1 + 00). Using (25.4-13) thus leads to
ит — Ho ts —
а / = Ут 25.4-15
@ 01 + 00 2еВ ? ( )

25.4 COHERENT OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS 1273
where т = 7, /2eB is the mean number of detected photoelectrons for state “1”. For a
bit error rate BER = 10-9, we obtain О == 6 and therefore т = 36, corresponding to
a receiver sensitivity то = ут = 18 photoelectrons рег bit (averaged over both logic
states).
Binary phase shift keying (BPSK) homodyne system. For a binary PSK (BPSK)
system, logic states “1” and “О” are represented by phase shifts y, = 0 and 7, respec-
tively, as illustrated in Fig. 25.4-5(b). Assuming that фг = 0 and wy; = ws, — иг = 0
in (25.4-8), the means and variances of the photocurrent for states “1” and “О” are,
respectively,
mean fy = 7, + 2,/7,27, variance o? = 2e7,B for state “1” (25.4-16)
mean о = 2 — 2,\/ts2z, Variance oa = 2e7,B for state “0”. ,
In this case, therefore, we obtain
ит Ho Us —
_ —2,/—% ~2/m 25.4-17
@ 0, +09 2eB ( )
which is a factor of 2 greater than that in the OOK case. This is also evident by
comparing the constellation diagrams in Figs. 25.4-5(a) and (b). Again, a BER = 10-9
leads to Q я 6, but now т = 9. Since each of the two logic states of the bit
must carry an average of nine photoelectrons in this case, the average number of
photoelectrons per bit is по = т = 9. We conclude that the receiver sensitivity is
9 photoelectrons/bit and that the BPSK homodyne receiver is hence twice as sensitive
as the OOK homodyne receiver — it requires half the number of photoelectrons to
achieve the same BER.
eto и) we
a | a Ke ° a № и № у Figure 25.4-5 Constellation diagrams for
= ._._ . -* — ®- OOK, BPSK, and QPSK homodyne systems.
NS | р хи м " и The red circle represents noise.
(a) OOK (b) BPSK (c) OPSK
Quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) homodyne system. Asa final example, we
consider the sensitivity of a homodyne quadrature-PSK (QPSK) system, and demon-
strate that it turns out to be 9 photoelectrons per bit as well. This can be established by
comparing the constellation diagrams presented in Figs. 25.4-5(b) and (с). The distance
[41 — [to between the nearest points in the QPSK constellation is smaller than that
between the nearest points in the BPSK constellation by a factor of 1/,/2, while the
noise о is the same. Again, a BER = 10~® leads to О = 6, but in this case О = 2m
so that m = 18. In QPSK, however, each symbol corresponds to two bits so that the
number of photoelectrons per bit то = 77/2 = 9, which is the same result as that for
the BPSK homodyne system.

1274 — СНАРТЕВ25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
Comparison of heterodyne- and homodyne-system performance. The heterodyne
digital receiver requires a factor of two more photons per bit than the homodyne
receiver. This may be understood by comparing the signal currents for OOK keying
in both cases. For homodyning we obtain ил — мо = 2/2527, аз provided in (25.4-
13), whereas for heterodyning the result is a factor of \/2 smaller, namely ил — до =
V2%,tz. The origin of the distinction is the cosinusoidal factor in (25.4-8a), which is
constant for homodyning but oscillates at the intermediate frequency шт for heterodyn-
ing, with an RMS value of 1/2. Since the noise variances are the same (a? = 05), апа
since Q ~ 6 fora BER = 10-9, we have 6 = \/m/2 so that M = т/2 = 36. This
factor-of-two penalty for heterodyning carries over to phase shift keying, as indicated
in Table 25.4-1.
Tabulation of receiver sensitivities. Table 25.4-1 provides a comparison of the re-
ceiver sensitivities (photons per bit) for several optical receivers and modulation for-
mats under ideal conditions. Though it appears that the direct-detection OOK system
has approximately the same sensitivity as the best coherent system (homodyne PSK),
namely = 9 photons per bit, the conversion gain provided by the strong local oscillator
in homodyning has the salutary effect of minimizing the role of circuit noise. The
performance of direct-detection systems, in contrast, is often limited by circuit noise
in practice. While the use of an avalanche photodiode in a direct-detection receiver can
mitigate the role of circuit noise, the intrinsic APD gain noise increases the receiver
sensitivity from 10 photons per bit to at least 10F' photons per bit, where РЁ is the APD
excess noise factor. Direct detection could in principle offer performance comparable
to that of coherent detection were noiseless APDs (F' = 1) available. It is useful to
compare the results tabulated in Table 25.4-1 with those presented in Table 19.6-1 for
OOK direct-detection receivers in the presence of circuit noise and gain noise.
Table 25.4-1 Receiver sensitivity (number of photons per bit) for various receivers and modulation
formats for an ideal detector. Homodyning is superior to heterodyning and PSK is superior to OOK.
Direct Detection Homodyne Heterodyne
OOK 10 18 36
PSK (BPSK & QPSK) — 9 18
FSK — — 36
25.5 FIBER-OPTIC NETWORKS
A communication network comprises a set of communication links connecting mul-
tiple users (terminals) distributed within some geographical area. Messages or data
may be passed from one terminal to another by transmission through one or several
links along paths controlled by routers and switches. A local-area network (LAN),
for example, connects terminals such as computers, printers, video monitors, and copy
machines in a circumscribed region such as a building, campus, or manufacturing plant.
Larger networks include the telephone network, the global Telex network, and the
Internet. The network may make use electrical cables, optical fibers, or satellite links.
Fiber-optic networks rely on fiber-optic links together with electronic and/or optical
routers and switches (see Chapter 24).

25.5 FIBER-OPTIC NETWORKS 1275
A. Network Topologies and Multiple Access
In its simplest configuration, a network containing N nodes is constructed by making
use of a dedicated point-to-point link between each node and every other node. How-
ever, this configuration requires N(N — 1) duplex (bidirectional) point-to-point links,
and therefore entails the use of 2N(N — 1) transmitters and 2N(N — 1) receivers.
Topologies that make use of fewer point-to-point links, and fewer transmitters and
receivers, are available; they include the star, ring, and bus topologies depicted in
Fig. 25.5-1, along with a system for accessing the shared links. In these networks,
only N transmitters and N receivers are necessary.
rae (c) Bus г. mn an mn

coupler
(@ Star (b) Ring () Mesh
Figure 25.5-1 Network topologies: (a) star; (b) ring; (c) bus; (d) mesh.

In the star network, each node is connected to every other node via the star coupler
residing at the center of the network; the power transmitted by any given node is
equally distributed among all other nodes. In the ring and bus networks, the fiber
passes through the nodes so that data may be extracted from, or added to, the optical
signal at any node. The mesh network is a more general configuration. Since the light
transmitted by any node travels different distances to different nodes, the receivers
must be able to accommodate the received power over a broad range of levels. Stated
differently, each receiver must have a large dynamic range. Several networks of the
same or different topologies are often interconnected to create a larger network, as
schematized in Fig. 25.5-2.

Central office
Backbone мг Backbone
eS
Se
Access Access <;
YP
Figure 25.5-2 A network containing ring and
Access bus sub-networks connected by digital cross-
ы connects (XCs) at central offices. Backbone ring
networks carry heavier traffic and feed access
networks.

1276 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
Interface
The interface between the terminal and the fiber network at each node includes a
receiver, a transmitter, and an electronic add—drop multiplexer (ADM), as portrayed
in Fig. 25.5-3(a). The receiver detects the optical signal, and the ADM extracts data
and adds new data that modulate a source and transmits a new optical signal through
another fiber. This interface is said to be opaque since the light is detected and regen-
erated at each node. A transparent interface is coupled to the fiber network optically,
as illustrated in Fig. 25.5-3(b) (optical directional couplers are described in Secs. 24.1
and 24.3). An optical interface to a bidirectional (duplex) fiber uses two directional
couplers to transmit and receive in either direction, as shown in Fig. 25.5-3(c).
+ | | + ' |
AS A Pon es М
(a) (b)
Figure 25.5-3 Interfaces between a node and the fiber network. (a) Opaque interface. The signal
is converted from optical to electronic (O/E) and the ADM extracts data and adds new data, which
is used to generate a new optical signal (E/O). (b) Optically coupled (transparent) interface using a
directional coupler. (c) Optically coupled interface to a duplex fiber using two directional couplers.
Multiple Access
The signals transmitted by the network nodes share the same fiber (the medium). To
avoid confusion, a scheme for multiple access or medium access is necessary. Time-
domain, frequency-domain, and code-domain multiple access systems are in use:
= Time-division multiple access (TDMA) is similar to time-division multiplex-
ing (TDM), which is used in conventional point-to-point communication sys-
tems (Sec. 25.3B). The nodes send their data through the shared medium during
interleaved time slots. Buffers may be used to store data until the appropriate
time. Since it is not possible to synchronize the timing of all nodes, guard times
separating consecutive slots are necessary.
= Frequency-division multiple access (FDMA) is similar to frequency-division
multiplexing (FDM) (Sec. 25.3B). Here, the nodes send their data through
the shared medium in preassigned spectral bands, and there is no need to
synchronize the bit clocks of the input signals. In optical networks, FDMA is
called wavelength-division multiple access (WDMA), which is the counterpart
of wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM).
= Code-division multiple access (CDMA) is similar to code-division multiplexing
(CDM) (Sec. 25.3B). In CDMA, each node is preassigned a unique address code.
Data transmitted by a node is encoded with the address code of the destination
node. Each node correlates its own address code with the incoming signal. This
locks it to only those bits associated with its own address, and it disregards all
other bits. The data arrive in the form of a sequence of packets, each with the
address of its destination (Sec. 24.3F).
Synchronous Optical Network (SONET)
SONET [and its international version, the Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH)] is a
TDM standard used for transmission over optical fibers. It addresses the difficulty of
time-division multiplexing for signals with slightly different clock rates by embedding

25.5 FIBER-OPTIC NETWORKS 1277
these signals within time frames of longer duration. The payload (the signal bits) are
allowed to float within the frames, but the frames are perfectly synchronous. SONET
provides a hierarchy of multiplexed signals in which the basic unit, known as the STS-
1 signal or the optical carrier-1 (OC-1), transports data at 51.84 Mb/s. Combining №
such signals generates the OC-N signal, which has a rate N times greater, as sum-
marized in Table 25.5-1. For example, OC-192 and OC-768 operate at approximately
10 Gb/s and 40 Gb/s, respectively. An example of operation at different data transport
rates is illustrated in Example 25.5-1.

Table 25.5-1 Transmission rates (Mb/s) in the STS hierarchy used by the SONET network.
ОС-1 OC-3 OC-12 OC-24 OC-48 OC-192 OC-768 OC-1920
51.84 155.52 622.08 1244.16 2 488.32 9 953.28 39 813.12 99 532.80

EXAMPLE 25.5-1. Ring Network.
An example of a fiber-optic 4-node ring network iiiii
operating at different data rates is illustrated in @
Fig. 25.5-4. Each of the 4 nodes transmits data to
the other 3 nodes at either the OC-12 (622 Mb/s) 5 д
or the ОС-24 (1.24 Gb/s) rate, as shown. The < OC-24 SD
fiber segment connecting nodes 1 and 2 carries the
heaviest traffic at a combined rate OC-12 + OC-12 о © © :
+ OC-24 = OC-48 (2.5 Gb/s). The traffic on the о :
243 and 3 <> 4 segments is at the lighter OC-24 ы @ Е
rate (1.24 Gb/s). Rey

© <

(©)

Figure 25.5-4 A 4-node ring network. ТЕГ
ПИ
В. Wavelength-Division Multiplexing Networks
A wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) fiber-optic network uses coarse or dense
WDM for communication along its links and WDMA for medium access. The nodes
are connected in a particular topology (e.g., star, ring, bus, or mesh), and each node
transmits into one or several wavelength channels and receives from one or several
wavelength channels. The existence of multiple wavelength channels for each physical
connection adds another dimension to the network and offers additional flexibility, but
this comes at the expense of additional complexity.

Broadcast-and-Select WDM Network

The simplest WDM network is the broadcast-and-select network. Each node trans-
mits at a unique fixed wavelength and broadcasts its transmission to all other nodes
via passive optical couplers. The receiver at each node selects the particular wave-
length addressed to it by means of a tunable filter. An example is provided by the
5-node network displayed in Fig. 25.5-5(a): nodes 1,2,..., 5 transmit at wavelengths
А1, A2,°°+,A5, respectively. An optical star coupler broadcasts each transmission to all
other nodes. In the state shown, for example, node 1 is tuned to channel А; nodes 2,

1278 — CHAPTER25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
3, and 4 are tuned to channel А; and node 5 is tuned to channel Ag. As illustrated in
the equivalent connection diagram in Fig. 25.5-5(b), node 2 transmits to node 5, node
5 transmits to node 1, and node 1 multicasts its transmission to nodes 2, 3, and 4.
» OQ ©
M 43s Й Ss Figure 25.5-5 (a) A WDM broadcast-
aa уу and-select network and (6) its equivalent
№. А! logical connections.
ey wy ee Oo
№
у ©
(а) (b)

In another example, shown in Fig. 25.5-6(a), the receiver of each node is tuned to the
wavelength transmitted by its next neighbor. This network, which has a star physical
topology, is thus equivalent to a ring logical topology, as illustrated in Fig. 25.5-6(5).

х х—^—®®
APNA2 20
` 3 Figure 25.5-6 A WDM network in the
А! Аз star physical topology (a) is equivalent to the
№1, а ring logical topology (5).
y № 3
—-» @ o
№
(а) (b)

The network changes its state, i.e., the wavelengths to which each node is tuned, as
desired. Dynamic coordination is required to avoid conflict and collisions.
Multi-Hop Broadcast-and-Select WDM Network
The requirement that each of the nodes in the broadcast-and-select network be capable
of selectively detecting any of the wavelengths transmitted by the other nodes can
be demanding. This requirement is alleviated in a multi-hop network, in which each
node is allocated two different wavelength channels for transmission and only two
different channels for reception. At any time, a node may transmit at one of its two
allocated wavelengths and may receive by tuning to one its two allocated wavelengths.
The channels are allocated to the nodes in such a way that a node may access any other
node by following either a single-hop (i.e., direct) connection or a two-hop connection
via an intermediate node. In the network shown in Fig. 25.5-7(a), for example, node 2
can transmit to node 1 directly via channel Аз. Though node 1 cannot transmit to node 2
directly, since they share no common wavelength, this transmission can occur in two
hops: node 1 transmits to node 3 on the А! channel, and node 3 subsequently transmits
to node 2 on the Ag channel [Fig. 25.5-7(5)]. This configuration is therefore called
a multi-hop broadcast-and-select network. The logical topology of the network is
displayed in Fig. 25.5-7(c).

However, networks with a large number of nodes are not well served by the
broadcast-and-select, single-hop, or multi-hop configurations. Since the power trans-
mitted by each node must reach all other nodes, the system becomes inefficient when
the number of nodes is large. Also the number of channels used, which must equal or
exceed the number of nodes, becomes prohibitive for large networks.

25.5 FIBER-OPTIC NETWORKS 1279
1 2 A3
Ат, А2 Аз. Aa 7 № ye (0 (2)
№ (A SS fa
Аз, №5 №, № ха fo №
РА м <> №
Az. № Аз, 1 INS РА IN
Ал, Ag №5, 6S 4 № © х (3)
(a) (b) (©)
Figure 25.5-7 (а) A WDM multi-hop broadcast-and-select network. (6) A two-hop connection
from node 1 to node 2 via node 3. (с) Logical topology of the network.
Wavelength-Routed Networks
In a wavelength-routed network, a pair of nodes communicates by use of one of the
wavelength channels following some connection path. Another pair of nodes may use
the same wavelength channel if their connection path does not share a common link
with the path of the first pair. For example, in the network shown in Fig. 25.5-8(a),
nodes | and 2 communicate on channel Ау, and so do nodes 2 and 3. However, nodes
1 and 3 must use a different wavelength Ло if they use the path connecting them via
node 2. Similarly, nodes 4 and 1 communicate via a third channel Аз since their path
contains links that use the Л! and Az channels.
Вл. IK
№. 44 1 А! 2 a (г) А! (2)
А А! А! А! № №
№1, Аз В > — OAL. А, Аз
Xj A1.A2 — Ry’ —
У Е © чи
yy Е 1 |
ree А Avda ГРЕЕТ
4 ©
Ay A3 А!

(a) TTT (Б) (с)

Figure 25.5-8 (a) А 5-node, 3-channel wavelength-routed ring network. (5) Logical topology of
the network. (c) An optical add—drop multiplexer (OADM) used at node 5.

In this network, each link carries one or more wavelengths (but not necessarily all
of the wavelengths, as is the case in the broadcast-and-select network). For example,
the link between nodes 4 and 5 carries traffic at three wavelength channels, but each
of the other four links carry only two channels. Also, each node transmits and receives
data at one or more wavelengths. For example, node 5 receives data from node 4 at A;
and from node 3 at Ag; it transmits data to node 1 at А1 ; data carried by channel Аз pass
through this node without being detected. The logical connections for this network are
shown in Fig. 25.5-8(Ъ).

The key component in a wavelength-routed WDM network is the optical add—drop
multiplexer (OADM) (Sec. 24.2A). Each node has an OADM that extracts (drops)
data from certain wavelength channels on the incoming fiber, adds data to certain
channels on the outgoing fiber, and lets data on certain channels of the incoming
fiber pass through to the outgoing fiber without change. An OADM comprises an
optical demultiplexer (ODMUX), an add-drop multiplexer (ADM), and an optical
multiplexer (OMUX). As an example, the OADM used at node 5 of the network shown

1280 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS
in Fig. 25.5-8(а) is detailed in Fig. 25.5-8(c). Agile networks use ROADMs, which are
reconfigurable OADMs (Example 24.3-3).

An optical transport network employing a ROADM is illustrated in Fig. 25.5-9. Data
packets from many Internet Protocol (IP) packet routers are connected to an optical
client interface (e.g., at a rate of 100 Gb/s over short-reach optical links of roughly 40
km) and are combined in small groups (one or more) and subsequently multiplexed
into a WDM signal, which is transmitted over a single-fiber optical line traversing
thousands of kilometers without intermediate electronic processing. The fiber may, for
example, carry 100 wavelength channels, each operating at a rate of 200 Gb/s, on a
50-GHz optical frequency grid, for an overall bit rate of 20 Tb/s. The optical signal is
then demultiplexed in a reverse fashion at the other of the line, and ultimately feeds
other IP packet routers. Along the way, certain channels are dynamically directed to
other optical lines in the network by use of ROADMs.

100 Gb/s Optical transport system
eee ry 20 Tb/s А ПР
их 2 ye
>< i la А1, Аз... Ам А1, Аз... АМ 2 = =.
= en. Ам Line Drop¥Y Add
interface interface © | >
Routers LT Routers
—Wpy
Add 9
Figure 25.5-9 A WDM optical transport system linking two sets of ТР routers and exchanging
data with other optical lines in the network via ROADMs that add and drop information.

Wavelength-routed networks with configurations other than the ring configuration
have nodes with multiple incoming and outgoing fibers. At these nodes, more complex
routers are required. For example, a node with two incoming and two outgoing fibers,
as shown in Fig. 25.5-10, employs an optical cross-connect (OXC) that receives data
from selected incoming fibers/channels, adds data to selected outgoing fibers/channels,
and routes data on selected incoming channels to selected outgoing channels. The
OXC uses multidimensional space—wavelength switches and ADMs (see Sec. 24.3D).
A wavelength-routed network also uses a hub node, which makes use of a server to
process data at all wavelength channels.

Nps Ags Age Ag U X Ap Ag Аз №
x
Switch
8
ADM
D о
| + м № Figure 25.5-10 An optical cross-connect

. U x (OXC) at a node with two incoming and two

= x outgoing fibers, each with four wavelength

7, | А channels.

< Add tT [hh Drop

READING LIST 1281
«ПИ
EXAMPLE 25.5-2. WDM Upgrade of a Ring
Network о

® Аг.
А А!

А 4-node wavelength-routed WDM ring network Л,» ®

operates on 3 channels with wavelengths А1, A2, and 5 :

Аз at the rates shown in Fig. 25.5-11. This network ° Аз и

is an upgraded version of the network considered шт 2 :

Example 25.5-1. Nodes 1 and 3 access wavelengths @ x Хи,

A; and Az; node 4 accesses wavelengths А! and Аз; a 2

and node 2 accesses all three wavelengths. In the CD dy <

upgraded network, the nodes communicate at twice № X

the rates of the original network, but the highest MO о

rate in any of Фе WDM channels does not exceed ee

that of the original network. The fiber segment Lore

connecting nodes 1 and 2 carries the heaviest traffic Figure 25.5-11 Schematic of a 4-node, 3-

ata combined OC-96 rate (5 Gb/s), but the highest — channel WDM ring network.

rate at any given wavelength is OC-48 (2.5 Gb/s).

ПИ

READING LIST

Optical Fiber Communications

See also the reading lists in Chapters 9, 10, 15—19, 23, and 24.

H. Venghaus and N. Grote, eds., Fibre Optic Communication: Key Devices, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed.
2017.

E. Agrell, M. Karlsson, A. R. Chraplyvy, D. J. Richardson, P. M. Krummrich, P. Winzer, K. Roberts,
J. К. Fischer, S. J. Savory, В. J. Eggleton, М. Secondini, Е. В. Kschischang, A. Lord, J. Prat,
I. Tomkos, J. E. Bowers, S. Srinivasan, M. Brandt-Pearce, and N. Gisin, Roadmap of Optical
Communications, Journal of Optics, vol. 18, 063002, 2016.

R. Noé, Essentials of Modern Optical Fiber Communication, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2016.

P. J. Winzer, C. J. Chang-Hasnain, A. E. Willner, R. C. Alferness, R. W. Tkach, and T. G. Giallorenzi,
eds., A Third of a Century of Lightwave Technology: January 1983—April 2016, TEEE—-OSA, 2016.

Е. Mitschke, Fiber Optics: Physics and Technology, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2016.

J. Chesnoy, ed., Undersea Fiber Communication Systems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 2nd paperback
ed. 2016.

T. L. Singal, Optical Fiber Communications: Principles and Applications, Cambridge University
Press, 2016.

L. N. Binh, Optical Fiber Communication Systems with MATLAB and SIMULINK Models, CRC
Press/Taylor & Francis, 2nd ed. 2015.

S. Bottacchi, Theory and Design of Terabit Optical Fiber Transmission Systems, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2014.

S. Kumar and M. J. Deen, Fiber Optic Communications: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley,
2014.

I. P. Kaminow, T. Li, and A. E. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-A: Components
and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

I. Р. Kaminov, Т. Li, and A. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-B: Systems and
Networks, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

1282 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, Academic Press/Elsevier, 5th ed. 2013.

G. P. Agrawal, Fiber-Optic Communication Systems, Wiley, 4th ed. 2010.

G. Keiser, Optical Fiber Communications, McGraw-Hill, 4th ed. 2010.

J. М. Senior, Optical Fiber Communications: Principles and Practice, Prentice Hall/Pearson, 3rd ed.
2009.

C. K. Kao, Optical Fiber Systems: Technology, Design, and Applications, McGraw-Hill, 1982.

Photonic Integrated Circuits

See also the reading list on silicon photonics in Chapter 18.

H. Radamson, E. Simoen, J. Luo, and C. Zhao, CMOS Past, Present and Future, Elsevier-Woodhead,
2018.

R. A. Soref, D. Buca, and S.-Q. Yu, Group IV Photonics: Driving Integrated Optoelectronics, Optics
& Photonics News, vol. 27, no. 1, рр. 32-39, 2016.

D. Thomson, A. Zilkie, J. E. Bowers, T. Komljenovic, G. T. Reed, L. Vivien, D. Marris-Morini,
Е. Cassan, L. Virot, J.-M. Fédéli, J.-M. Hartmann, J. H. Schmid, D.-X. Xu, Е. Boeuf, P. O’Brien,
G. Z. Mashanovich, and M. Nedeljkovic, Roadmap on Silicon Photonics, Journal of Optics, vol.
18, 073003, 2016.

L. Chrostowski and M. Hochberg, Silicon Photonics Design: From Devices to Systems, Cambridge
University Press, 2015.

K. Bergman, L. P. Carloni, A. Biberman, J. Chan, and G. Hendry, Photonic Network-on-Chip Design,
Springer-Verlag, 2014.

К. Nagarajan, С. Doerr, and Е. Kish, Semiconductor Photonic Integrated Circuit Transmitters and
Receivers, in I. P. Kaminow, T. Li, and A. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications
VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

Г. A. Coldren, 5. W. Corzine, and М. L. MaSanovi¢, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits,
Wiley, 2nd ed. 2012.

D. Dai, J. Bauters, and J. E. Bowers, Passive Technologies for Future Large-Scale Photonic Integrated
Circuits on Silicon: Polarization Handling, Light Non-Reciprocity and Loss Reduction, Light:
Science & Applications (2012) 1, e1; 401:10.1038Лза.2012.

B. Razavi, Design of Integrated Circuits for Optical Communications, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2012.

H. Zimmermann, Integrated Silicon Optoelectronics, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2010.

R. G. Hunsperger, Integrated Optics: Theory and Technology, Springer-Verlag, 1982, 6th ed. 2010.

К. A. Soref and J. P. Lorenzo, Single-Crystal Silicon: A New Material for 1.3 and 1.6 ит Integrated-
Optical Components, Electronics Letters, vol. 21, pp. 953-954, 1985.

$. Е. Miller, Integrated Optics: An Introduction, Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 48, pp. 2059-
2069, 1969.

Modulation and Multiplexing

T. Hayashi, Multi-Core Optical Fibers, in I. Р. Kaminow, Т. Li, and А. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber
Telecommunications VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

Y. Awaji, K. Saitoh, and S. Matsuo, Transmission Systems Using Multicore Fibers, in I. P. Kaminow,
T. Li, and A. E. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-B: Systems and Networks,
Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

D. W. Peckham, Y. Sun, A. McCurdy, and R. Lingle, Jr., Few-Mode Fiber Technology for Spatial
Multiplexing, in I. Р. Kaminow, Т. Li, and А. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications
VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

K.-P. Ho and J. M. Kahn, Mode Coupling and its Impact on Spatially Multiplexed Systems, in
I. Р. Kaminow, T. Li, and А. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-B: Systems
and Networks, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

P. J. Winzer, R. Ryf, and S. Randel, Spatial Multiplexing Using Multiple-Input Multiple-Output Sig-
nal Processing, in I. Р. Kaminow, Т. Li, and А. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications
VI-B: Systems and Networks, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

Г. К. Oxenlowe, A. Clausen, М. Galili, H. C. H. Mulvad, H. Л, Н. Hu, and Е. Palushani, Ultra-
High-Speed Optical Time Division Multiplexing, in I. Р. Kaminow, T. Li, and А. Е. Willner, eds.,
Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-A: Components and Subsystems, Academic Press/Elsevier,
6th ed. 2013.

READING LIST 1283

Coherent Optical Detection and Communications

K. Kikuchi, Fundamentals of Coherent Optical Fiber Communications, Journal of Lightwave Tech-
nology, vol. 34, рр. 157-179, 2016.

X. Zhou and C. Xie, eds., Enabling Technologies for High Spectral-Efficiency Coherent Optical
Communication Networks, Wiley, 2016.

D. J. Geisler, C. М. Schieler, T. М. Yarnall, M. Г. Stevens, В. $. Robinson, and $. A. Hamilton,
Demonstration of a Variable Data-Rate Free-Space Optical Communication Architecture Using
Efficient Coherent Techniques, Optical Engineering, vol. 55, 111605, 2016.

M. Mazurczyk, Spectral Shaping in Long Haul Optical Coherent Systems With High Spectral Effi-
ciency, Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 32, pp. 2915—2924, 2014.

T. J. Xia and С. A. Wellbrock, Commercial 100-Gbit/s Coherent Transmission Systems, in I. Р. Kaminow,
T. Li, and A. E. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommunications VI-B: Systems and Networks,
Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

P. Bayvel, C. Behrens, and D. S. Millar, Digital Signal Processing (DSP) and its Application in
Optical Communication Systems, in I. Р. Kaminow, T. Li, and A. Е. Willner, eds., Optical Fiber
Telecommunications VI-B: Systems and Networks, Academic Press/Elsevier, 6th ed. 2013.

V. V. Protopopov, Laser Heterodyning, Springer-Verlag, 2009.

T. Okoshi and K. Kikuchi, Coherent Optical Fiber Communications, Kluwer, 1988.

М. С. Teich, Laser Heterodyning, Journal of Modern Optics (Optica Acta), vol. 32, pp. 1015-1021,
1985.

M. C. Teich, Coherent Detection in the Infrared, in R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, eds., Semicon-
ductors and Semimetals, Volume 5, Infrared Detectors, Academic Press, pp. 361-407, 1970.

A. Javan, Е. A. ВаШК, and W. Г. Bond, Frequency Characteristics of a Continuous-Wave He—Ne
Optical Maser, Journal of the Optical Society of America, vol. 52, pp. 96-98, 1962.

B. J. McMurtry and A. E. Siegman, Photomixing Experiments with a Ruby Optical Maser and a
Traveling-Wave Microwave Phototube, Applied Optics, vol. 1, pp. 51-53, 1962.

Fiber-Optic Networks

M. Tornatore, G.-K. Chang, and G. Ellinas, eds., Fiber-Wireless Convergence in Next-Generation
Communication Networks: Systems, Architectures, and Management, Springer-Verlag, 2017.

X. Zhou and C. Xie, eds., Enabling Technologies for High Spectral-Efficiency Coherent Optical
Communication Networks, Wiley, 2016.

У. Lépez and L. Velasco, eds., Elastic Optical Networks: Architectures, Technologies, and Control,
Springer-Verlag, 2016.

J. М. Simmons, Optical Network Design and Planning, Springer-Verlag, 2nd ed. 2014.

C. Kachris, K. Bergman, and I. Tomkos, eds., Optical Interconnects for Future Data Center Networks,
Springer-Verlag, 2013.

M. Cvijetic and I. B. Djordjevic, Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, Artech,
2013.

D. Hood and E. Trojer, Gigabit-Capable Passive Optical Networks, Wiley, 2012.

M. Toy, Networks and Services: Carrier Ethernet, PBT, MPLS-TP, and VPLS, Wiley, 2012.

М. Antoniades, G. Ellinas, and I. Roudas, eds., WDM Systems and Networks: Modeling, Simulation,
Design and Engineering, Springer-Verlag, 2012.

T. E. Stern, G. Ellinas, and K. Bala, Multiwavelength Optical Networks: Architectures, Design, and
Control, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2009.

B. Mukherjee, Optical WDM Networks, Springer-Verlag, 2006.

Р. R. Prucnal, ed., Optical Code Division Multiple Access: Fundamentals and Applications, CRC
Press/Taylor & Francis, 2006.

E. Desurvire, Global Telecommunications: Broadband Access, Optical Components and Networks,
and Cryptography, Wiley, 2004.

E. Desurvire, Global Telecommunications: Signaling Principles, Protocols, and Wireless Systems,
Wiley, 2004.

P. E. Green, Jr., Fiber Optic Networks, Prentice Hall, 1992.

1284 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

Seminal and Historical

I. P. Kaminow, Optical Integrated Circuits: A Personal Perspective, Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 26, pp. 994-1004, 2008.

A. Hasegawa, ed., Massive WDM and TDM Soliton Transmission Systems, Kluwer, 2002.

R. M. Gagliardi and S. Karp, Optical Communications, Wiley, 1976, 2nd ed. 1995.

р. Г. Begley, ed., Selected Papers on Free-Space Laser Communications II, SPYE Optical Engineer-
ing Press (Milestone Series Volume 100), 1994.

E. G. Rawson, ed., Selected Papers on Fiber Optic Local Area Networks, SPIE Optical Engineering
Press (Milestone Series Volume 91), 1994.

L. D. Hutcheson and S. C. Mettler, eds., Selected Papers on Fiber Optic Communications, SPIE
Optical Engineering Press (Milestone Series Volume 88), 1993.

C. K. Kao, Optical Fibre, Institution of Electrical Engineers, 1988.

E. Desurvire, J. R. Simpson, and P. C. Becker, High-Gain Erbium-Doped Traveling-Wave Fiber
Amplifier, Optics Letters, vol. 12, pp. 888-890, 1987.

R. J. Mears, L. Reekie, I. M. Jauncey, and D. N. Payne, Low-Noise Erbium-Doped Fibre Amplifier
Operating at 1.54 ит, Electronics Letters, vol. 23, pp. 1026-1028, 1987.

B. J. Ainslie and C. R. Day, A Review of Single-Mode Fibers with Modified Dispersion Characteris-
tics, Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. LT-4, рр. 967-979, 1986.

S. D. Personick, Fiber Optics: Technology and Applications, Plenum, 1985.

S. B. Poole, D. N. Payne, and M. E. Fermann, Fabrication of Low Loss Optical Fibers Containing
Rare Earth Ions, Electronics Letters, vol. 21, рр. 737—738, 1985.

Т. Li, Advances in Optical Fiber Communications: An Historical Perspective, JEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. SAC-1, pp. 356-372, 1983.

J. Е. Midwinter, Optical Fibers for Transmission, Wiley, 1979; Krieger, reissued 1992.

D. B. Keck, R. D. Maurer, and P. C. Schultz, On the Ultimate Lower Limit of Attenuation in Glass
Optical Waveguides, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 22, pp. 307-309, 1973.

О. Е. DeLange, Wide-Band Optical Communication Systems: Part I—Frequency-Division Multiplex-
ing, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 58, pp. 1683—1690, 1970.

М. С. Teich, Infrared Heterodyne Detection, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 56, pp. 37—46, 1968.

$. Е. Miller, Communication by Laser, Scientific American, vol. 214, no. 1, pp. 19-27, 1966.

К. С. Kao and G. A. Hockham, Dielectric-Fibre Surface Waveguides for Optical Frequencies, [EE
Proceedings, vol. 113, pp. 1151-1158, 1966.

С. J. Koester and Е. Snitzer, Amplification in a Fiber Laser, Applied Optics, vol. 3, рр. 1182-1186,
1964.

Popular

J. Hecht, Great Leaps of Light, JEEE Spectrum, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 28-53, 2016.

P. J. Winzer, Scaling Optical Fiber Networks: Challenges and Solutions, Optics & Photonics News,
vol. 26, по. 3, рр. 28-35, 2015.

J. Hecht, Understanding Fiber Optics, Laser Light Press, 5th ed. 2015.

J. Hecht, Recycled Fiber Optics: How Old Ideas Drove New Technology, Optics & Photonics News,
vol. 23, no. 2, рр. 22—29, 2012.

J. Hecht, City of Light: The Story of Fiber Optics, Oxford University Press, 1999, paperback ed. 2004.

PROBLEMS
25.1-1 Optical Fiber Communication Systems. Discuss the validity of each of the following
statements and indicate the conditions under which your conclusion is applicable.
(a) The wavelength A, = 1300 nm is preferred to A, = 870 nm for all optical fiber
communication systems.

PROBLEMS 1285

(b) The wavelength Ло = 1550 nm is preferred to Л. = 1300 nm for all optical fiber
communication systems.

(c) Single-mode fibers are superior to multimode fibers because they have lower atten-
uation coefficients.

(d) There is no pulse spreading at A, = 1312 nm in silica-glass fibers.

(e) Compound semiconductor devices are required for optical fiber communication sys-
tems.

(Г) APDs are noisier than p-i—n photodiodes and are therefore not useful for optical
fiber communication systems.

25.1-2 Components for Optical Fiber Communication Systems. The design of an optical fiber
communication system involves many choices of fibers, sources, amplifiers, and detectors,
some of which are displayed in Fig. 25.2-3. Suggest appropriate choices for each of the
applications listed below. Though more than one answer may be correct, some choices may
be incompatible.

(a) A transoceanic cable carrying data at a 2.5 Gb/s rate with 100-km repeater spacings.
(b) A 1-m cable transmitting analog data from a sensor at 1 kHz.

(c) A link for a computer local-area network operating at 500 Mb/s.

(d) A 1-km data link operating at 100 Mb/s with +50° C temperature variations.

25.2-1 Performance of a Plastic Fiber Link. A short-distance, low-data-rate communication sys-
tem uses plastic fiber with an attenuation coefficient 0.5 dB/m, an LED that generates 1 mW
at a wavelength of 870 nm, and a photodiode with receiver sensitivity —20 dBm. Assuming
a power loss of 3 dB each at the input and output couplers, determine the maximum length
of the link. Assume that the data rate is sufficiently low that dispersion effects play no role.

25.2-2 Maximum Length of an Attenuation-Limited System. An optical fiber communication
link is designed for operation at 10 Mb/s. The source is а 100-и\У LED operating at
870 nm and the fiber has an attenuation coefficient of 3.5 dB/km. The fiber consists of 1-km
segments and each connector between segments introduces a loss of 1 dB. The input and
output couplers each introduce a loss of 2 dB and the safety margin is 6 dB. Two receivers
are available: a Si p—i-n photodiode receiver with a sensitivity of 5000 photons per bit, and a
Si APD receiver with a sensitivity of 125 photons per bit. Determine the receiver sensitivity
P,. (dBm units) and the maximum length of the link for each receiver.

25.2-3 Maximum Data Rate for an Attenuation-Limited System. A 50-km optical fiber link is
operated at a wavelength of 1550 nm. The source is а 2-mW InGaAsP laser and the fiber
has an attenuation coefficient of 0.2 dB/km. Connectors and couplers introduce a total loss
of 8 dB and the safety margin is 6 dB. The receiver is an InGaAs APD with a sensitivity
of 1000 photons per bit at a bit error rate of 10-9. Determine the maximum data rate that
can be used assuming that the system is attenuation-limited. If the required bit error rate is
10-" instead, what is the maximum data rate?

25.2-4 Maximum Length of an Analog Link. An analog optical fiber communication link uses
intensity modulation to transmit data at a bandwidth of B = 10 MHz with a signal-to-
noise ratio of 40 dB. The source is a А, = 870 nm light-emitting diode that produces
an average power of 100 и\ with a maximum modulation index of 0.5. The fiber is a
multimode step-index fiber with an attenuation coefficient of 2.5 dB/km. The detector is an
avalanche photodiode with mean gain G = 100, excess noise factor F = 5, and responsivity
R = 0.5 A/W (excluding the gain). Using the theory presented in Sec. 19.6D, assume
that circuit noise is negligible and calculate the optical power sensitivity of the receiver.
Calculate the attenuation-limited maximum length L of the fiber.

25.2-5 Time Budget for а Dispersion-Limited System. A 100-km single-mode fiber link operates
at a wavelength of 1550 nm. The source is an InGaAsP laser diode of spectral width 0.2 nm
and response time 20 ps. The fiber has a dispersion coefficient of 17 ps/km-nm. The receiver
uses an InGaAs APD and has a response time of 0.1 ns. Determine the maximum data rate
based on the criterion that the response time of the fiber does not exceed 25% of the bit
duration. Also, determine the maximum data rate using the criterion that the response time
of the overall system does not exceed 70% of the bit duration. If a dispersion-shifted fiber
is used instead, so that the dispersion coefficient is reduced to 1 ps/km-nm, what are the
maximum data rates under the two criteria set forth above?

25.3-1 Number of WDM Channels. Determine the number of WDM channels that fit in the C-
band (1530-1565 nm) and in the O-band (1260-1360 nm) if the channel spacing is 75 GHz.

1286 CHAPTER 25 OPTICAL FIBER COMMUNICATIONS

25.5-1 Number of Nodes in a Broadcast-and-Select WDM Network. The maximum number
of nodes N that can be used by a broadcast-and-select WDM network is often limited by
the available optical power. Determine N for a local area network using an optical star
coupler connected to each of the nodes by a fiber of 2-km length, 0.3 dB/km attenuation
coefficient, and 1 dB of connector loss. The star coupler distributes the power equally among
its outputs and introduces an additional loss of 3 dB. Each node uses a 1-mW optical source,
the receiver sensitivity is —35 dBm, and а 5-dB safety margin is assumed.

25.5-2 Wavelength-Routed WDM Ring Network. Consider a 4-node, 6-channel WDM network.
Each node uses an add-drop multiplexer to transmit or receive at any of three different
wavelengths assigned to it, but allows the other three wavelengths to pass through. For
example, node 1 may add or drop data at channels 1, Ло, ог Аз, but passes through data at
Xa, As, and Ag. Allocate sets of three add-drop channels to each of the nodes 2, 3, and 4,
in such a way that any node on the ring may communicate with any of the other nodes. The
idea is that each node must have one add—drop channel in common with each of the other
three nodes, but this channel must not be in common with nodes in-between.

APPENDIX
с [
This appendix provides a brief review of the Fourier transform, and its properties,
for functions of one and two variables.
A.1 ONE-DIMENSIONAL FOURIER TRANSFORM
The harmonic function F exp(j27vt) plays an important role in science and engineer-
ing. It has frequency и and complex amplitude F’. Its real part | F'| cos(27vt+ arg{F})
is a cosine function with amplitude |Ё| and phase аг {Е}. The variable $ usually
represents time; the frequency v has units of cycles/s or Hz. The harmonic function is
regarded as a building block from which other functions may be obtained by a simple
superposition.

In accordance with the Fourier theorem, a complex-valued function f(t), satisfying
some rather unrestrictive conditions, may be decomposed as a superposition integral
of harmonic functions of different frequencies and complex amplitudes,

f()= ] F(v) exp(j2mvt) dv. (A.1-1)
—со Inverse
Fourier Transform
The component with frequency и has a complex amplitude F'(v) given by
F(v) = ] (Е exp(—j2mvt) dt. (A.1-2)
oo Fourier Transform
Fv) is termed the Fourier transform of f(t), and f(t) is the inverse Fourier trans-
form of F'(v). The functions f(t) and F(v) form a Fourier transform pair; if one is
known, the other may be determined.

In this book we adopt the convention that exp(j27vt) is a harmonic function with
positive frequency, whereas exp(—j27vt) represents negative frequency. The opposite
convention is used by some authors, who define the Fourier transform in (A.1-2) with
a positive sign in the exponent, and use a negative sign in the exponent of the inverse
Fourier transform (A.1-1).

In communication theory, the functions f(t) and F'(v) represent a signal, with f(t)
its time-domain representation and F'(v) its frequency-domain representation. The
absolute-squared value | f(t)|? is called the signal power, and |F'(v)|? is the energy
spectral density. If |F'(v)|? extends over а wide frequency range, the signal is said to
have a wide bandwidth.

Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1287

1288  APPENDIXA FOURIER TRANSFORM
Properties of the Fourier Transform
Some important properties of the Fourier transform are provided below. These proper-
ties can be proved by direct application of the definitions (A.1-1) and (A.1-2) (see any
of the books in the Reading List).
= Linearity. The Fourier transform of the sum of two functions is the sum of their
Fourier transforms.
= Scaling. If f(t) has a Fourier transform Fv), and т is a real scaling factor, then
f(t/7) has a Fourier transform |т|Е(ти). This means that if f(t) is scaled by
a factor т, its Fourier transform is scaled by a factor 1/7. Thus, if 7 > 1, then
f (t/T) is a stretched version of f(t), whereas Е(ти) is a compressed version of
F(v). The Fourier transform of f(—t) is F(—v).
= Time Translation. If f(t) has a Fourier transform F'(v), the Fourier transform of
f(t — т) is exp(—j27vr) F(v). Thus, delay by time т is equivalent to multipli-
cation of the Fourier transform by a phase factor exp(—j2avrT).
= Frequency Translation. If F'(v) is the Fourier transform of f(t), the Fourier trans-
form of f(t) exp(j2mvot) is F(v — vo). Thus, multiplication by a harmonic func-
tion of frequency vp is equivalent to shifting the Fourier transform to a higher
frequency №.
= Symmetry. If f(t) is real, then F(v) has Hermitian symmetry, 1.е., Е(-и) =
F*(v). If f(t) is real and symmetric, then F'(v) is also real and symmetric.
= Convolution Theorem. If the Fourier transforms of } ($) and f(t) are Е! (и) and
F,(v), respectively, the inverse Fourier transform of the product
F(v) = Fi(v)Fo(v) (A.1-3)
is
Co
f(t) = ] filr) folt — 7) dr. (A.1-4)
—со Convolution
The operation defined in (A.1-4) is known as the convolution of f;(¢) with f2(t).
Convolution in the time domain is therefore equivalent to multiplication in the
Fourier domain.
= Correlation Theorem. The correlation between two complex functions is defined
as
f(t) = | повета (A.1-5)
—со Correlation
The Fourier transforms of f(t), fo(t), and f(t) are related by
F(v) = FY (v)Fo(v). (A.1-6)
If fo(t) = fi(t), (A.1-5) is called the autocorrelation.
= Parseval’s Theorem. The signal energy, which is the integral of the signal power
| f (t)|?, equals the integral of the energy spectral density | F'(v)|?, so that
Co Co
] | f(t)|? dt -/ |F(v)|? dv. (A.1-7)
—со —со Parseval’s Theorem

A.1 ONE-DIMENSIONAL FOURIER TRANSFORM 1289
Examples
The Fourier transforms of some important functions are provided in Table A.1-1. The
Fourier transforms of many other functions are readily obtained by making use of the
properties of linearity, scaling, delay, and frequency translation. The functions used in
Table A.1-1 have the following definitions:
= rect(t) = 1 for |t| < т, and = 0 elsewhere, 1.е., it is a pulse of unit height and
unit width centered about t = 0.
= 6(t) is the impulse function (also called the Dirac delta function), which is defined
as 0(t) = Шпо ‚о arect(at). It is the limit of a rectangular pulse of unit area as
its width approaches zero so that its height approaches infinity.
= sinc(t) = sin(zt)/(at) is a symmetric function with a peak value of unity at
{ = 0 and with zeros at t = +1,+2,....
Table A.1-1 Selected functions and their Fourier transforms.
Function SO Fv)
Uniform | 1 d(v)
0 t 0 и
Impulse o(t) 1
0 t о и
Rectangular rect (1) sinc (Vv) WA \
“20 № t “1 0 1 и
Exponential 9 vat > exp (-|t\) — 7
70d * 1+ (ль) | т
Gaussian / \ exp (-1?2) exp (-712) / \
о 1 И го | И
Hyperbolic A \ sech (zt) sech (ль) и №
secant —1 0 1 1 —1 0 1 и
Chirp? exp (м2) с ИМ exp (=jrv2)
0 t 0 и
Impulses ‹ _ эт (Мли
р о 1 t „> 8 ”) sin (ли) iV VoVVi у
Comb - х 6(#— т) У би-т с. ..
it хит m= 00 14 я
“The double-sided exponential function is shown. The Fourier transform of the single-sided exponential,
f(t) = exp(—t) with t > 0, is F(v) = 1/[1 + j27v]. Its magnitude is 1/\/1 + (27v)?.
Тре functions cos(xt”) and cos(mv”) are shown. The function sin(7#) is shown in Fig. 4.3-6.

1290  APPENDIXA FOURIER TRANSFORM
А.2 TIME DURATION AND SPECTRAL WIDTH

It is often useful to have a measure of the width of a function. The width of a function of
time f(t) is its time duration and the width of its Fourier transform F'(v) is its spectral
width (or bandwidth). Since there is no unique definition for the width, a plethora
of definitions are in use. All definitions, however, share the property that the spectral
width is inversely proportional to the temporal width, in accordance with the scaling
property of the Fourier transform. The following definitions are used at different places
in this book.
The Root-Mean-Square Width
The root-mean-square (RMS) width оу of a nonnegative real function f(t) is defined
by

Героев Oat ay

Fat © PO dt |
If f(t) represents a mass distribution (¢ representing position), then # represents the
centroid and о, the radius of gyration. If f(t) is a probability density function, these
quantities represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively. As an example, the
Gaussian function f(t) = exp(—t?/20?) has an RMS width o;. Its Fourier transform
is given by F(v) = (1/27 0,) exp(—v?/202), where
1
oy = = (А.2-2)
270;

is the RMS spectral width.

This definition is not appropriate for functions with negative or complex values. For

such functions the RMS width of the absolute-squared value | f(t) |? is used,
we [Ro - во at where f= SR tf? а
t= ри = FO рю *
Г (ОР at Л ЛОР at
We call this version of о; the power-RMS width.

With the help of the Schwarz inequality, it can be shown that the product of the
power RMS widths of an arbitrary function f(t) and its Fourier transform Е(и) must
be equal to or greater than 1/47,

1
оо, > —, (A.2-3)
An Duration-Bandwidth
Reciprocity Relation
where the spectral width о’, is defined by
2 РР ГИР
"о РРР | ЕР dv
Thus the time duration and the spectral width cannot simultaneously be made аг-
bitrarily small. The Gaussian function f(t) = exp(—t?/407), for example, has a

A.2 TIME DURATION AND SPECTRAL WIDTH 1291
power-RMS width o;. Its Fourier transform is also a Gaussian function, F(v) =
(1/2./7 в, exp(—v?/402), with power-RMS width

1
Oy =. (А.2-4)
Ato;
Since o,0, = 1/47, the Gaussian function has the minimum permissible value of the
duration—bandwidth product. In terms of the angular frequency w = 271,
O10 > 5. (А.2-5)

If the variables ¢ and w, which usually describe time and angular frequency (rad/s),
are replaced with the position variable x and the spatial angular frequency К (rad/m),
respectively, then (A.2-5) becomes

Ox0k > 3. (A.2-6)
In quantum mechanics, the position x of a particle is described by the wavefunction
(a), and the wavenumber К is described by a function ¢(k), which is the Fourier
transform of (5). The uncertainties of x and К are the RMS widths of the probability
densities |7(a)|? and |¢(k)|?, respectively, so that о’ and о’, are interpreted as the
uncertainties of position and wavenumber. Since the particle momentum is p = hk
(where i = h/2m and В is Planck’s constant), the position-momentum uncertainty
product satisfies the inequality
h
Ox0p = =; (A.2-7)
2 Heisenberg
Uncertainty Relation
which is known as the Heisenberg position—momentum uncertainty relation.
The Power-Equivalent Width
The power-equivalent width of a signal f(t) is the signal energy divided by the peak
signal power. If f(t) has its peak value at t = 0, for example, then the power-equivalent
width is
© FOP
T= ть dt. (A.2-8)
Г. (0)

The double-sided exponential function f(t) = exp(—|t|/7), for example, has а
power-equivalent width т, as does the Gaussian function f(t) = exp(—zt?/2r7). This
definition is used in Sec. 12.1, where the coherence time of light is defined as the
power-equivalent width of the complex degree of temporal coherence.

The power-equivalent spectral width is similarly defined by

> ЕР

B= ———___ dy. A.2-9

[iro ит”

If f(t) is real, so that |F'(v)|? is symmetric, and if it has its peak value at и = 0, the

power-equivalent spectral width is usually defined as the positive-frequency width,

© |v)

B= ] ———_ dy. (А.2-10)
о |Е(О)Р

1292  APPENDIXA FOURIER TRANSFORM
In the case when Е(и) = т/(1 + j27vT), for example, we have
1
B=—. (A.2-11)
4т
This definition is used in Sec. 19.6А to describe the bandwidth of photodetector circuits
susceptible to photon and circuit noise (see also Prob. 19.6-5).
Using Parseval’s theorem (A.1-7), together with the relation F(0) = [°>, f(t) dt,
(A.2-10) may be written in the form
B= Е (А.2-12)
СТ’
where
оо 2
T [En oat) ‘] A.2-13
PPO at ae
is yet another definition of the time duration [the square of the area under f(t) divided
by the area under f7(t)]. In this case, the duration—bandwidth product BT = 1/2.
The 1/e-, Half-Maximum, and 3-dB Widths
Another type of measure of the width of a function is its duration at a prescribed
fraction of its maximum value (1/\/2, 1/2, 1/e, or 1/e?, are examples). Either the
half-width or the full width on both sides of the peak may be used. Two commonly
encountered measures are the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) and the half-
width at 1/ /2-maximum, called the 3-dB width. The following are three important
examples:
= The exponential function f(t) = exp(—t/r) for > 0 and f(t) = 0 fort < 0,
which describes the response of a number of electrical and optical systems, has a
1/e-maximum width At, ;, = т. The magnitude of its Fourier transform Ё(и) =
7/(1 + 72тит) has a 3-dB width (half-width at 1/\/2-maximum)
1
Av3-4B = ——.- (A.2-14)
2пт
= The double-sided exponential function f(t) = exp(—|t|/7) has а half-width at
1/e-maximum АН/. = т. Its Fourier transform F(v) = 2т/[1 + (2тит)?],
known as the Lorentzian distribution, has a full-width at half-maximum
1
Дигунм = —, (А.2-15)
UT
and is usually written in the form F(v) = (Av/2z)/[v? + (Av/2)?], where
Av = Avswym_. The Lorentzian distribution describes the spectrum of certain
light emissions (see Sec. 14.3D).
= The Gaussian function f(t) = exp(—t?/2r?) has a full-width at 1/e-maximum
АН /е = 2У2т. Its Fourier transform F(v) = 2m 7 exp(—27?7v”) has a full-
width at 1/e-maximum
2
Ди). = У? (A.2-16)
UT

A.3 TWO-DIMENSIONAL FOURIER TRANSFORM — 1293
and a full-width at half-maximum
V2In2
Дины = ——— (А.2-17)
тт
so that
Avpwan = VIn2 Ди» = 0.833 AM /¢. (А.2-18)
The Gaussian function is also used to describe the spectrum of certain light emis-
sions (see Sec. 14.3D), as well as to describe the spatial distribution of light beams
(see Sec. 3.1).
A.3 TWO-DIMENSIONAL FOURIER TRANSFORM
We now consider a function of two variables f(x, у). If т and у represent the coordi-
nates of a point in a two-dimensional space, then f(x, у) represents a spatial pattern
(e.g., the optical field in a given plane). The harmonic function F exp|[—j2a(v,% +
Vyy)| is regarded as a building block from which other functions may be composed
by superposition. The variables и, and 1, represent spatial frequencies in the x and
у directions, respectively. Since x and у have units of length (mm), и, and и, have
units of cycles/mm, or lines/mm. Examples of two-dimensional harmonic functions
are illustrated in Fig. A.3-1.
y y y |
(а) (b) (c)
Figure A.3-1 The real part, || cos[27v,2 + 27vyy + arg{F’}], of a two-dimensional harmonic
function: (а) и, = 0; (b) vy = 0; (с) arbitrary и, and vy. For this illustration we have assumed that
arg{F'} = 0 so that the white and dark regions represent positive and negative values of the function,
respectively.

The Fourier theorem may be generalized to functions of two variables. A function
f(a, у) may be decomposed as a superposition integral of harmonic functions of x and
у,

со
f(a,y) = // F (vz, Vy) exp [—Jj2m (2% + Vyy)| ам, dvy , (A.3-1)
a Inverse
Fourier Transform

1294 APPENDIX A FOURIER TRANSFORM
where the coefficients F'(v,, и) are determined by use of the two-dimensional Fourier
transform
F (vz, Vy) = // f(x,y) exp [12п(игх + vyy)| dx dy. (A.3-2)
Fourier Transform
—©
Our definitions of the two- and one-dimensional Fourier transforms, (A.3-2) and
(A.1-2), respectively, differ in the signs of their exponents. The choice of these signs
are, of course, arbitrary, as long as opposite signs are used in the Fourier and inverse
Fourier transforms. In this book we have adopted the convention that exp(j27vt)
has positive temporal frequency и, while exp[—j27(v,.x + vyy)| has positive spatial
frequencies и, and vy. We have elected to use different signs in the spatial (two-
dimensional) and temporal (one-dimensional) cases to simplify the notation used in
Chapter 4 (Fourier optics), in which the traveling wave exp(+j2avt) exp|—j (Kea +
kyy + k,z)] has temporal and spatial dependences of opposite sign.
Properties
Many properties of the two-dimensional Fourier transform are clear generalizations
of those of the one-dimensional Fourier transform, but others are unique to the two-
dimensional case:
= Convolution Theorem. The two-dimensional convolution of two functions, }1 (т, у)
and (т, у), with Fourier transforms Е! (и, у) and Fy(vz, vy), respectively, is
written as со
le.) = ff ледье-гли-уе у. (AB)
—©
The Fourier transform of the convolution f(z, у) is
F (vy, Vy) = Fi(ve, Vy) Fo(ve, ву), (A.3-4)
so that convolution in the spatial domain is equivalent to multiplication in the
Fourier domain, as in the one-dimensional case.
= Separable Functions. If f(x,y) = fr(x) fy(y) is the product of one function of
x and another of y, then its two-dimensional Fourier transform is a product of
one function of и, and another of v,. The two-dimensional Fourier transform of
f(x, у) is then related to the product of the one-dimensional Fourier transforms
of f,(x) and f,(y) by F(vz, vy) = F,(—v,)Fy(—v,). We provide two examples:
(1) the Fourier transform of 6(a — x9) 0(y — yo), which represents an impulse lo-
cated at (то, yo), is the harmonic function exp[j27(v,%o + ку); (2) the Fourier
transform of the Gaussian function exp[—7(x? + y?)] is the Gaussian function
exp[—m(v2 + и).
= Circularly Symmetric Functions. The Fourier transform of a circularly symmetric
function is also circularly symmetric. Consider, for example, the circ function,
which is denoted by the symbol circ(x, у), and is given by
—~J1, yrrty<l A3-5
Из, у) { 0, otherwise. (A-3-9)

READING LIST 1295
Its Fourier transform is given by
Ji 2пи
F(z, Vy) = ти р), Up = \/v2+0v2, (A.3-6)
р
where J; is the Bessel function of order 1. Both of these circularly symmetric
functions are illustrated in Fig. A.3-2.
f(x,y) F(vx, vy)
x Vy
(a) (Б)
Figure A.3-2 (а) The сис function and (5) its two-dimensional Fourier transform.
READING LIST
L. Chaparro, Signals and Systems using MATLAB, Academic Press, 2nd ed. 2015.
G. R. Cooper and C. D. McGillem, Probabilistic Methods of Signal and System Analysis, Oxford
University Press, 3rd ed. 2007.
B. P. Lathi, Linear Systems and Signals, Oxford University Press, 2nd ed. 2004.
S. Haykin and B. Van Veen, Signals and Systems, Wiley, 2nd ed. 2003.
A. V. Oppenheim, A. S. Willsky, and S. H. Nawab, Signals and Systems, Prentice Hall, 1983, 2nd ed.
1997.
К. М. Bracewell, The Fourier Transform and Its Applications, McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed. 2000.
J. О. Gaskill, Linear Systems, Fourier Transforms, and Optics, Wiley, 1978.
L. E. Franks, Signal Theory, Prentice Hall, 1969, revised ed. 1981.
1986.

APPENDIX

с [

This appendix provides a review of the essential characteristics of опе- and two-
dimensional linear systems.

B.1 ONE-DIMENSIONAL LINEAR SYSTEMS

Consider a system whose input and output are the functions f;(¢) and f2(t), respec-
tively. The system is characterized by a rule that relates the output to the input. In
general, the rule may take the form of a simple mathematical operation such as f(t) =
log|fi(t)], an integral transform, or a differential equation. An example is a harmonic
oscillator that undergoes a displacement f2(t) in response to a time-varying force f(t).
Linear Systems
A system is said to be linear if it satisfies the principle of superposition, i.e., if its
response to the sum of any two inputs is the sum of its responses to each of the inputs
separately. The output at time $ is, in general, a weighted superposition of the input
contributions at different times т,

f(t) = ] h(t;7)filr) dr, (B.1-1)
where h(t; т) is a weighting function representing the contribution of the input at time
т to the output at time #. If the input is an impulse at time т, so that д (Е) = 6(t — Tr),
then (B.1-1) yields f(t) = h(t; 7). Thus h(t; т) is the impulse response function of
the system (also known as the Green’s Function).

Linear Shift-invariant Systems
A linear system is said to be time-invariant or shift-invariant if, when its input is
shifted in time, its output shifts by an equal time, but otherwise remains the same. The
impulse response function is then a function of the time difference h(t; 7) = h(t — Tr).
Under these conditions (B.1-1) becomes
oO

fo(t) = / h(t — 1) far) 4. (B.1-2)
The output f(t) is then the convolution of the input 1 (#) with the impulse response
function h(t) [see (A.1-4)]. If fi(t) = 6(t), then fo(t) = A(t); if fi(t) = d(t — 7),
then fo(t) = h(t — т), as illustrated in Fig. B.1-1.
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1296

B.1 ONE-DIMENSIONAL LINEAR SYSTEMS 1297
A(t) A(t —7)
Input Sosa Output | |
0 T t h(t) 0 T t
Figure B.1-1 Response of a linear shift-invariant system to impulses.
The Transfer Function
In accordance with the convolution theorem discussed in Appendix A [see (A.1-3)],
the Fourier transforms F)(v), F2(v), and H(v) of fi(t), fo(t), and h(t), respectively,
are related by
Fy(v) = Hv) ЕЦ). (B.1-3)
If the input д (8) is a harmonic function F\(v)exp(j27vt), the output fo(t) =
H(v)F\(v) exp(j27vt) is also a harmonic function of the same frequency but with
a modified complex amplitude F,(v) = F\(v)H(v), as illustrated in Fig. B.1-2. The
multiplicative factor Н(и) is known as the system’s transfer function; it is the Fourier
transform of the impulse response function. Equation (B.1-3) embodies the essence
of the usefulness of Fourier methods in the analysis of linear shift-invariant systems.
To determine the output of a system for an arbitrary input, we simply decompose the
input into its harmonic components, multiply the complex amplitude of each harmonic
function by the transfer function at the appropriate frequency, and superpose the
resultant harmonic functions.
Input Stier Output
t Но») t
ej2mut Но») ej2mut
Figure B.1-2 Response of a linear shift-invariant system to a harmonic function.
Examples
= Ideal system: H(v) = 1 and h(t) = 6(t); the output is a replica of the input.
= Ideal system with delay: H(v) = exp(—j2mvT) and h(t) = 6(t — т); the output
is a replica of the input delayed by time т.
= System with exponential response: H(v) = т/(1 + j2mvrT) and h(t) = е ЧТ for
t > 0, and A(t) = 0 otherwise; this represents the response of a system described
by a first-order linear differential equation, e.g., that representing an RC circuit
with time constant 7. An impulse at the input results in an exponentially decaying
response.
= Chirped system: H(v) = exp(—jav?) and h(t) = e~J*/4 exp(jrt?); the system
distorts the input by imparting to it a phase shift proportional to v?. An impulse
at the input generates an output in the form of a chirped signal, i.e., a harmonic
function whose instantaneous frequency (the derivative of the phase) increases
linearly with time. This system describes the propagation of optical pulses through
media with a frequency-dependent phase velocity; it also describes changes in
the spatial distribution of light waves as they propagate through free space (see
Secs. 23.3A and 4.1C, respectively).

1298  APPENDIXB LINEAR SYSTEMS
Linear Shift-Invariant Causal Systems
The impulse response function h(t) of a linear shift-invariant causal system must
vanish for t < 0 since the system’s response cannot begin before the application of
the input. The function h(t) is therefore not symmetric and its Fourier transform, the
transfer function H(v), must be complex. It can be shown’ that if h(t) = 0 for t < 0,
then the real and imaginary parts of H(v), denoted H’(v) and H’(v), respectively, are
related by
1 co H”
H'(v) = ~| Hts) ds (B.1-4)
T Лю SY
1 со H’
H"(v) = ~| AS) ag, (B.1-5)
T Jo ¥ — § Hilbert Transform
where the Cauchy principal values of the integrals are to be evaluated, 1.е.,
со v—A со
] - in, ( +f ). A>0.
—со A>0 —oo v+A
Functions that satisfy (B.1-4) and (B.1-5) are said to form a Hilbert transform pair,
H"(v) being the Hilbert transform of H’(v).

If the impulse response function h(t) is also real, its Fourier transform must be
symmetric, H(—v) = H*(v) (see Appendix A, Sec. A.1). As а result, the real part
H’(v) then has even symmetry, and the imaginary part H’(v) has odd symmetry. The
integrals in (B.1-4) and (B.1-5) may then be rewritten as integrals over the interval
(0, со), and the resultant equations are known as the Kramers-Kronig relations:

2 [> sH"(s)
H'(v) = — >= d B.1-6
Е Sas (B.1-6)
2 со Н’
H"(v) = = ] НЕ) as, (B.1-7)
TJg и Kramers—Kronig Relations

In summary, the Hilbert-transform relations, or the Kramers—Kronig relations, relate
the real and imaginary parts of the transfer function of a linear shift-invariant causal
system, so that if one part is known at all frequencies, the other part may be determined.
Example: The Harmonic Oscillator
The linear system described by the differential equation

a? d 9
— — t) = ЛС B.1-8
(Ga toy +48) fl fi(t) ( )
describes a harmonic oscillator with displacement f2(¢) under an applied force f(t),
where wp is the resonance angular frequency and С is a coefficient representing damp-
ing effects. The transfer function H(v) of this system may be obtained by substituting

1 See, e.g., L. Е. Franks, Signal Theory, Prentice Hall, 1969, revised ed. 1981.

B.2 TWO-DIMENSIONAL LINEAR SYSTEMS 1299
fi(t) = exp(j2avt) and fo(t) = H(v) exp(j27vt) in (B.1-8), which yields
1 1
Hv) = — =>; B.1-9
(y) (27)? v2 — и? + jvAv ( )
where мо = wo/27 is the resonance frequency, and Av = C/2z7. The real and imagi-
nary parts of Н(и) are therefore, respectively,
1 и? — и?
H'(v) = В.1-10
”) = Ga? We PP + WAvp (Вто)
1 vAv
H"(v) = -—> —=— ss B.1-11
ОО + ALP erly

Since the system is causal, H’(v) and H’(v) satisfy the Kramers—Kronig relations.
When 1 > Av, H'(v) and H’(v) are narrow functions centered about vp. For и & vo,
(vi — и?) = 2 (м — и), whereupon (В.1-10) and (B.1-11) may be approximated by

1 Av /41%
H"(v) = -—— ——._—.. B.1-12
И OP Uy vy + (AvP ery
и
H'(v) = 2——-H"(v). B.1-13
ен") (B.1-13)
Equation (В.1-12) has a Lorentzian form. The transfer function of the harmonic-
oscillator system is used in Secs. 5.5 and 15.1 to describe dielectric and atomic
systems.
B.2 TWO-DIMENSIONAL LINEAR SYSTEMS
A two-dimensional system relates a pair of two-dimensional functions, }1 (т, у) and
fo(x, у), called the input and output functions. These functions may, for example, rep-
resent optical fields at two parallel planes, with (т, у) representing position variables;
the system comprises the free space and optical components that lie between the two
planes.

The concepts of linearity and shift invariance defined in the one-dimensional case
are easily generalized to the two-dimensional case. The output f(x,y) of a linear
system is related to its input 11 (т, у) by a superposition integral

CO
fotos) = | [вбок wala yd! dy (B2-1)

—©
where h(x, у; 2’, y’) is a weighting function that represents the effect of the input at
the point (z’, у’) on the output at the point (x,y). The function h(x, y; 2’, у’) is the
impulse response function of the system (also known as the point-spread function).

The system is said to be shift-invariant (or isoplanatic) if shifting its input in
some direction shifts the output by the same distance and in the same direction without
otherwise altering it (see Fig. B.2-1). The impulse response function then depends on
differences of position, h(x, y; x’, у’) = h(a —2’, y—y’), whereupon (B.2-1) becomes

1300  APPENDIXB LINEAR SYSTEMS
the two-dimensional convolution of h(a, у) with fi (x, y):
CO
fo(a,y) = // (г.у) h(a —2',y —y') da! dy’. (B.2-2)
—©
Applying the two-dimensional convolution result provided in (A.3-4) of Appendix А
yields
Fo(vz, Vy) = H(ve, Vy) Five, Vy), (B.2-3)
where Fo(vz, Vy), Н(и», му), and F\(v,, vy) are the Fourier transforms of f(x,y),
h(x, у), and fi (x, y), respectively.
У У
Input System Output «
x A(x, у) ¢€ x
Sy) fay)
Figure B.2-1 Response of a two-dimensional linear shift-invariant system.

A harmonic input of complex amplitude Ё1 (их, и,) therefore produces a harmonic
output of the same spatial frequency but with complex amplitude Р5(и,,и,) =
H(vz, Vy) Е (vz, Vy), as illustrated in Fig. B.2-2. The multiplicative factor H(vz, vy) is
the system transfer function, which is the Fourier transform of its impulse response
function. Either of these functions allows us to characterize the system completely and
enables us to determine the output for an arbitrary input.

y y
Input Output
|-> —— System >
х x
Hoy, Vy)
ве л@х + YY) Нах, Vy) ет (их + yy)
Figure B.2-2 Response of a two-dimensional linear shift-invariant system to harmonic functions.

In summary, a two-dimensional linear shift-invariant system is characterized by
its impulse response function h(x, y) or its transfer function H(vz,v,). For exam-
ple, a system with h(x,y) = circ(x/ps,y/ps) smears each point of the input into
a patch in the form of a circle of radius p,. It has a transfer function H(v;,vy) =
PsJi (27 psp) /Vp, Where Vy = ,/V2Z + v2, which has the shape illustrated in Fig. A.3-
2(b). The system severely attenuates spatial frequencies higher than 0.61/p, lines/mm.

READING LIST
See the reading list in Appendix A.

APPENDIX
eC
This Appendix provides a brief overview of modes of linear systems that are de-
scribed explicitly by input-output relations that take the form of a matrix or integral
operation, or implicitly by a linear ordinary or linear partial differential equation.

Consider first a linear system described by an explicit input-output relation char-
acterized by a linear operator £ that operates on an input vector X to generate a
corresponding output vector Y:

хр У = Хх. (C.1-1)
The vector X may be an array of complex numbers, represented by a column matrix,
or a complex function of one or more variables. The modes of such a system are those
special inputs that remain unaltered (except for a multiplicative constant) upon passage
through the system. They thus obey
LXq = dqXq: (C.1-2)
Eigenvalue Problem
where 4 is an index that labels the mode. The vector X, is known as the eigenvector,
and the associated multiplicative constant Ла, which is generally a complex number,
is called the eigenvalue. The condition set forth in (C.1-2) is known as an eigenvalue
problem.

Consider next a linear dynamical system whose state is described by N continuous
variables constituting a vector X(t). The evolution of any of the N variables of this
N-dimensional vector is, in general, dependent on all N variables. However, the same
system may be described in a new coordinate system whereupon the № new variables
evolve independently, so that the description of the system decomposes into N in-
dependent one-dimensional systems. These decoupled variables are the modes of the
system.

Consider finally a linear system characterized implicitly by a linear partial differen-
tial equation that may be cast in the form of (C.1-2), where £ is a differential operator
and X is a complex function of one or several variables. In this case, the modes are
simply solutions of the differential equation and the eigenvectors are called eigenfunc-
tions. The notion of an input and an output is not meaningful in these circumstances.

We proceed to describe a number of applications of modal analysis in photonics.
Before commencing, however, we briefly review a number of geometrical concepts
from linear algebra. Associated with each pair of vectors X and Y is a complex scalar
quantity (X,Y) called the inner product. The square root of the inner product of
a vector X with itself, (X,X), is known as the norm of X and is a measure of its
“Jength.” The inner product of two vectors of unit norm can be thought of as the cosine
of the “angle” between them. Two vectors are said to be orthogonal if their inner
product is zero. If the vectors comprise arrays of complex numbers, {X;} and {Y;},
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1301

1302 APPENDIXC MODES OF LINEAR SYSTEMS
1 = 1,2,...,N, then (X,Y) = Ум, X;Y;. If, on the other hand, the vectors are
complex functions X(t) and Y(t), then (X,Y) = f° X*(t)Y (t)dt.

Two classes of operators £ that lead to solutions of the eigenvalue problem with
special properties are considered in turn:

Hermitian operators. Hermitian operators are defined by the property (X, LY) =
(СХ, У), i-e., the inner product is the same no matter to which of the two vectors the
operator is applied. The eigenvalues of a Hermitian operator are real and the eigen-
vectors are orthogonal. Further, the eigenvectors of a Hermitian operator obey the
variational principle, which is based on a scalar Eyar = $(X,£X)/(X, X), called
the variational energy. This principle states that the eigenvector Ху with the lowest
eigenvalue minimizes E,,,; the eigenvector Хо with the next lowest eigenvalue mini-
mizes Еуаг, Subject to the condition that it is orthogonal to Ху, and so on.
Unitary operators. Passive, lossless physical systems are described by unitary op-
erators, which are defined by the norm-preserving property (CX, СХ) = (Х,Х). An
example is the “rotation” operation. The eigenvalues of unitary operators are unimod-
ular, 1.е., [А | = 1, and therefore represent pure phase.
1) Modes of a Discrete Linear System
A discrete linear system is described by a matrix relation Y = MX, where the input
vector X is a set of N complex numbers (Xj, Х2,...,Хм) arranged in a column
matrix, Mis an М x N matrix that represents the linear system, and the output vector
У is also a column matrix of dimension №. The modes are those input vectors that
remain parallel to themselves upon transmission through the system, so that the matrix
equation

MX, = Л. Xq (C.1-3)
is obeyed. Thus, the modes of the system are the eigenvectors X, of the matrix М, and
the scalars Л. are the corresponding eigenvalues, which are determined by solving the
algebraic equation det(M — Al) = 0, where I is the identity matrix. There are N such
modes, labeled by the index а = 1,2,..., М.

The special case of binary systems (Л = 2) is particularly important in optics.
In a binary system, each vector is a pair of complex numbers (X1, X2) arranged in
a column matrix X. The system is characterized by a 2 x 2 square matrix М whose
elements are denoted A, B, C, and D. The relation Y = MX signifies

У |A Bl |X

У [CD] | Xe}
The eigenvalues are determined by solving the algebraic equation (A — \)(D — Л) —
BC = 0 for the two eigenvalues A; and A2.

The following are examples of optical systems described by binary linear systems:
Application: Polarization matrix optics. In polarization matrix optics (Sec. 6.1B),
the vector (Ху, X2) represents the components of the input electric field in two orthog-
onal directions (the Jones vector), and (У, Y2) similarly represents the output electric
field. The matrix M is the Jones matrix of the system. In this case, the modes are the
polarization states that are maintained as light is transmitted through the system.
Application: Ray matrix optics. In geometrical paraxial optics (Sec. 1.4), the po-
sition and angle of an optical ray are described by a vector (X 1, X2), and the effect
of optical components, such as lenses and mirrors, is described by a matrix M, called
the ray-transfer matrix or the ABCD matrix. For a closed optical system, such as a
resonator, the modes are ray positions and angles that self-reproduce after a round trip,
so that they are confined within the resonator.

APPENDIX С MODES OF LINEAR SYSTEMS 1303
Application: Multilayer matrix optics. In multilayer matrix optics (Sec. 7.1 A) light
is reflected and refracted at each boundary, so that there are forward- and backward-
traveling waves at each plane, with amplitudes described by a vector X = (X , Х2). А
system containing a set of boundaries between an input and an output plane is described
by a wave-transfer matrix M. The modes of such a system are the vectors that self
reproduce upon transmission through the system, so that if the system is replicated
periodically, as in a 1D photonic crystal (Sec. 7.2), the propagation modes are the
modes of the system M.
2) Modes of a Continuous System Described by an Integral Operator
Linear systems represented by integral operators are discussed in Appendix B. Con-
sider, for example, a function of time f(t), such as an optical pulse or a broadband
optical field, transmitted through a linear time-invariant system such as an optical filter.
The system is described by the convolution operation (A.1-4):
со
g(t) = ] h(t — 7) f(r) dr. (C.1-4)
—©

In this system, the vectors X and Y are the functions f(t) and g(t), respectively, and the
operator £ is an integral operator. The modes of this system are the harmonic functions
exp(j27vt). This is evident since the input function exp(j27vt) generates another
harmonic output function H(v) exp(j27vt), where H(v) is the Fourier transform of
h(t). In this case, there is a continuum of modes with continuous eigenvalues H(v).
Here, the index q is the frequency v, which takes continuous values.

Another example is a linear shift-invariant system that operates on a two-dimensional

(2D) function f(x,y) of the position (2, y), as described in (B.2-2):

CO

g(x,y) = [fm 2+, у-у) (т, у’) da ау. (С.1-5)

—со
The eigenfunctions are 2D harmonic functions exp[j27(v,x + vyy)], and the eigenval-
ues are H(v,, ку), the 2D Fourier transform of h(a, у). Again, there is a continuum of
eigenfunctions, labeled by the spatial frequencies (vz, Vy).
Translational symmetry and harmonic modes. It is not surprising that harmonic
functions are the modes of a shift-invariant system. Because the harmonic function is
invariant to time shift, i.e., it remains a harmonic function if translated in time, it is the
eigenfunction of the time-invariant (stationary) linear system. Similarly, because 2D
harmonic functions are invariant to translation in the plane, they are the eigenfunctions
of the space-invariant (homogeneous) linear system.

If the linear system is not space-invariant, i.e., does not enjoy translational symme-
try, then in the 2D case it is represented by the more general linear operation described
in (B.2-1): со

g(r) = [ [маза Ла” uf a! ay. C16)
—со
The eigenfunctions, which are now not necessarily harmonic functions, are determined
by solving the eigenvalue problem posed in (C.1-2), which in this case takes the form
of an integral equation
со
// (тит, у’) fala’, у’) da’ ау = № (т.ч), а=12..... (С.1-7)
—©
The functions f,(x, у) and the constants Л. are the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of
the system, respectively, and the index q labels a discrete set of modes.

1304  APPENDIXC MODES OF LINEAR SYSTEMS
Application: Optical resonator modes. An example is provided by light traveling
between the two parallel mirrors of a laser resonator (Sec. 11.22). The distributions of
the optical field in the transverse plane at the beginning and at the end of a single round
trip are the input and output of the system. The modes of the resonator are those field
distributions that maintain their form after one round trip. The kernel A(z, у; т’, у’) in
(C.1-7) represents propagation in free space and reflection from one of the mirrors,
followed by backward free-space propagation and reflection from the other mirror.
Clearly, the presence of curved mirrors, or mirrors of finite extent, makes this system
shift-variant. If the mirrors are spherical and are assumed to modulate the incoming
light by a phase factor that is a quadratic function of the radial distance, then the res-
onator modes are Hermite—Gaussian functions of x and у (see Sec. 3.3). In the presence
of apertures, (C.1-7) can only be solved numerically, as considered in Sec. 11.2E.
3) Modes of a System Described by an Ordinary Differential Equation
The dynamics of certain physical systems are characterized by a set of coupled ordi-
nary differential equations. For example, the dynamics of N coupled oscillators are
described by N differential equations that are conveniently written in matrix form as
4 2 №
OrorO- X = МХ, (C.1-8)
where X is a column matrix with components (Ху, Хо,..., Хм), Х = @Х/аР, and
M is an N x N matrix with time-independent coefficients, so that the system is time
invariant.
Time invariance requires that the modes be harmonic functions that take the form
exp(jwt), 1.е., the vector X(t) = X(0) exp(jwt). Hence, substitution in (C. 1-8) yields
МХ = w?X. (C.1-9)
This equation represents a discrete-system eigenvalue problem. Its eigenvalues provide
the resonance frequencies w),w2,..., wy of the modes, and its eigenvectors are called
the normal modes. All components of the eigenvector X, of mode 4 oscillate at the
same resonance frequency wy, without alteration of their relative amplitudes or phases.
In this sense, the modes are stationary solutions that are decoupled from one another.
4) Modes of a System Described by a Partial Differential Equation
Fields and waves are described by partial differential equations such as Maxwell’s
equations, which characterize the dynamics of the electric and magnetic fields in a
dielectric medium. Similarly, the Schrodinger equation expresses the dynamics of the
wavefunction of a particle subject to a specified potential. If these physical systems
are stationary, i.e., if the dielectric medium and the potential are time independent,
then each mode must be a harmonic function of time that takes the form exp(jwt) with
some frequency w. The wave equation is then converted into the generalized Helmholtz
equation 3
Ух [n(r) V x H] = =H, (C.1-10)
Со
where n(r) = €,/e(r) is the electric impermeability of the dielectric medium [see
(7.0-2)]. Analogously, the Schrddinger equation (14.1-1) yields the time-independent
Schrédinger equation (14.1-3),
h2
sv + vin U(r) = Ev(r), (C.1-11)
2m
where V(r) is the potential and Е = hw.

READING LIST 1305

Both of these equations take the form of an eigenvalue problem (C.1-2), where £

is a Hermitian differential operator characterized by the function n(r) or V(r). The
eigenvalues, which are real, provide the frequencies и), of the modes (and hence the
corresponding energies E, in the case of the Schrédinger equation). The eigenfunctions
are the spatial distributions of the electromagnetic field (or the wavefunction) for each
mode. Note that the field (or the wavefunction) of the gth mode evolves with time as
exp(jwgt) at all positions, so that each mode is stationary, as required.
Modes of fields/waves in a homogeneous medium with boundary conditions. Ш
the dielectric medium is homogeneous, i.e., the impermeability п(г) is constant, then
the system is shift-invariant. To be consistent with this translational symmetry, the
modes of the electromagnetic system must be harmonic functions of position, 1.е.,
plane waves. Similarly, if the potential V(r) is constant, then the modes are plane-
wave wavefunctions, so that the particle is equally likely to be found anywhere.

In other situations, n(r) and V(r) are constant within a finite region bounded by
a surface that imposes certain boundary conditions. For example, the electromagnetic
modes of a cavity resonator with perfectly conducting surfaces can be determined by
requiring that the parallel components of the electric field vanish at the surface. For a
rectangular resonator, the modes are harmonic functions of position — standing waves
oscillating in unison (see Sec. 11.3C). Similarly, the modes of a particle in a quantum
box (dot) are obtained by requiring that the wavefunction vanishes at the boundaries
(see Sec. 17.1G).

In yet another geometry, a homogeneous dielectric medium may be bounded in one
direction, e.g., by two parallel planar mirrors. Here, the boundary conditions corre-
spond to a discrete set of standing waves in the direction orthogonal to the mirrors
(transverse direction), with traveling waves in the parallel (axial) direction, so that the
modes travel in this optical waveguide as harmonic functions in the axial direction,
without altering their transverse distributions (see Sec. 9.1). If 6, is the propagation
constant of mode 4, then the eigenvalue is the phase factor exp(—j 642).

Modes of fields/waves in a periodic medium. As is evident from the previous exam-
ples, the modes of a system described by a partial differential equation are dictated by
the spatial distribution of the medium, e.g., the function n(r) or V(r). If this function is
constant, the modes must be invariant to arbitrary translation. If it is periodic, then the
modes must be invariant to translation by a period. This type of translational symmetry
requires that the modes be Bloch waves (see Sec. 7.2A). For example, if the medium
is homogeneous in the x and y directions but periodic in the z direction, a Bloch mode
takes the form of a harmonic function exp(—jKz), modulated by a periodic standing
wave px(z) with period equal to that of the medium; the dependence on «x and у is,
of course, harmonic. For a given value of K, the frequencies of the modes and the
shapes of the corresponding standing waves px (=) depend on the shape of the periodic
function n(r) or V(r). This type of translational symmetry results in a spectrum of
eigenvalues (and hence frequencies w or energies E = fw) in the form of bands that
are separated by bandgaps within which no modes are allowed. Thus, an electron in
a periodic potential distribution exhibits the well-known band structure of solids (see
Secs. 14.1D and 17.1A). Likewise, an optical field in a periodic dielectric medium, 1.е.,
a photonic crystal, exhibits a band structure with photonic bandgaps (see Secs. 7.2 and
7.3).

READING LIST
D.C. Lay, S. R. Lay, and J. J. McDonald, Linear Algebra and its Applications, Pearson, 5th ed. 2015.
S. Axler, Linear Algebra Done Right, Springer-Verlag, 3rd ed. 2015.
S. J. Leon, Linear Algebra with Applications, Pearson, 9th ed. 2014.
G. Strang, Introduction to Linear Algebra, Wellesley Cambridge Press, 4th ed. 2009.

ee
Roman Symbols and Acronyms
a = Radius of an aperture or fiber [m]; also, Radius of a spherical scattering particle [m]; also,
Radius of a circle [m]; also, Distance between locations [m]; also, Lattice constant [п]; also,
Length of a thin metallic rod [m]; also, Chirp parameter for an optical pulse
ao = Bohr radius (radius of ground state of Bohr hydrogen atom; ао = 0.53 A) [m]
a = Complex amplitude or magnitude of an optical wave; also, Normalized complex amplitude
of an optical field (|a|? = photon-flux density)
a = Normalized field amplitude in a cavity (|a|? = field energy in units of photon number)
a = Acceleration of a carrier [m - s~]
a = Primitive vector defining a lattice unit cell [m]
a = Complex-amplitude vector
A = Complex envelope of a monochromatic plane wave; also, Pulse amplitude
A(r) = Complex envelope of a monochromatic wave
A(v) = Fourier transform of the complex envelope of an optical pulse
A = Complex vector envelope of a monochromatic plane wave; also, Vector potential [V-s-m~*]
A = Absorbance
A(r,t) = Complex envelope of a polychromatic (e.g., pulsed) wave
A(t) = Complex envelope of an optical pulse
A = Area [m?]; also, Element of the ABCD ray-transfer and wave-transfer matrices M
Ас = Coherence area [m?|
Ai; = Element of Jacobian transformation matrix
A, = Relative atomic mass
Ai(-) = Airy function
A = Jacobian transformation matrix
A = Einstein A coefficient [5—1]
AC = Alternating current
ACS = American Chemical Society
ADC = Analog-to-digital converter
ADM = Add-drop multiplexer
ADP = Ammonium dihydrogen phosphate
AGIL = All gas-phase iodine laser
AM = Amplitude modulation
AMLCD = Active-matrix liquid-crystal display
AMOLED = Active-matrix organic light-emitting display
AND = AND logic gate
Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1306

SYMBOLS AND UNITS — 1307
AOC = Active optical cables
AOM = Acousto-optic modulator
APD = Avalanche photodiode
APS = American Physical Society
ASE = Amplified spontaneous emission
ASK = Amplitude shift keying
AWG = Arrayed waveguides
b = Radius of a circle [п]; also, Chirp coefficient [5?]
b = Bowing parameter
В = Magnetic flux-density complex amplitude [Wb - m~? or T]; also, Bandwidth [Hz]; also,
Bandwidth of an electrical circuit [Hz]; also, Spatial bandwidth [m~*]; also, Spectral width
supporting net gain in a laser medium [Hz]
В = Magnetic flux-density complex amplitude vector [Wb - m~? or Т]
Bo = Bit rate [b - s~4]
B = Power-equivalent spectral width [Hz]
В = Magnetic flux density vector [Wb - m~? or T]
B = Element of the ABCD ray-transfer and wave-transfer matrices M
В = Einstein В coefficient [m* - J~! - s~?]
BBO = Beta barium borate
BER = Bit error rate
BGR = Bragg grating reflector
BPF = Bandpass filter
BPP = Bulk plasmon polariton
BPSK = Binary phase shift keying
BRF = Birefringent filter
BSO = Bismuth silicon oxide
с = Speed of light [m - s~"]; also, Phase velocity [m - s~*]
Co = Speed of light in free space [т - 571]
C = Electrical capacitance [F]
C(-) = Fresnel integral
© = Coupling coefficient in a directional coupler [m~*]
C = Element of the ABCD ray-transfer and wave-transfer matrices M
C-band = Conventional optical fiber telecommunications band (1530-1565 nm)
CAD = Computer-aided design
CAPD = Conventional avalanche photodiode
CARS = Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering
CATV = Cable television
CCD = Charge-coupled device
CCT = Correlated color temperature
CCW = Counterclockwise
CD = Compact-disc
CDM = Code-division multiplexing
CDMA = Code-division multiple access
CFL = Compact fluorescent lamp
CLSM = Confocal laser-scanning microscopy
CMOS = Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
COB = Chip-on-board light-emitting diode
COIL = Chemical oxygen-iodine laser

1308 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
CPA = Chirped-pulse amplification
CRI = Color rendering index
CVD = Chemical vapor deposition
CW = Continuous-wave; also, Clockwise
CWDM = Coarse wavelength-division multiplexing
dr = Incremental volume [m*]
ds = Incremental length [m]
d = Coefficient of second-order optical nonlinearity [С - V~?]
dg = Effective coefficient of second-order optical nonlinearity [С - V~?]
dj; = Component of second-order optical nonlinearity tensor [С - V~?]
d;z = Component of second-order optical nonlinearity tensor (contracted indices) [C - V~?]
d(w3; ил, м5) = Coefficient of second-order optical nonlinearity (dispersive medium) [С - V~?]
d = Distance, Length, Thickness [m]
di, = Propagation length of a plasmon wave along its boundary [m]
dq = Thickness of dielectric layer in a layered metamaterial [п]
4-х = Mean distance traveled by a photon in a random laser before exiting [п]
dy, = Thickness of metallic layer in a layered metamaterial [m]
dmin = Minimum distance [п]
d, = Penetration depth [m]
d, = Distance of coupling prism from a waveguide [п]
d pulse = Length of a mode-locked optical pulse [m]
dg = Length along a small dimension [m]
d. = Mean distance traveled by a photon in a random laser before stimulating a clone photon [m]
D = Diameter [м]; also, Electric flux-density complex amplitude [С -m~?]; also, Width of an
optical beam [п]
р, = Width of an acoustic beam [m]
D* = Specific detectivity of a photodetector [em - Hz - W71]
D = Electric flux-density complex amplitude vector [С - m~?]
D., = Waveguide dispersion coefficient [5 - m~7]
D,, D, = Lateral widths [п]
Dy = Material dispersion coefficient [5 - m~?]
р, = Material dispersion coefficient [s? - m~1]
D = Electric flux density vector [С -m~?]
D = Element of the ABCD ray-transfer and wave-transfer matrices M
DBR = Distributed Bragg reflector
DC = Direct current
DCF = Dispersion-compensating fiber
DD = Direct detection
DESY = Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron
DEW = Directed-energy weapon
DFB = Distributed-feedback
DFF = Dispersion-flattened fiber
DFG = Difference-frequency generation
DGD = Differential group delay
DH = Double-heterostructure
DIP = Dual-inline package
DKDP = Deuterated potassium dihydrogen phosphate
DMD = Digital micromirror device
DMUX = Demultiplexer (also abbreviated as DEMUX)

SYMBOLS AND UNITS — 1309
DNG = Double-negative medium
DPC = Digital photon-counting device
DPS = Double-positive medium
DPSS = Diode-pumped solid-state
DQPSK = Differential quaternary phase shift keying
DRO = Doubly resonant oscillator
DSF = Dispersion-shifted fiber
DSP = Digital signal processing
DSPP = Doubly stochastic Poisson process
DUV = Deep ultraviolet, stretching from 200 to 300 nm
DVD = Digital-video-disc
DWDM = Dense wavelength-division multiplexing
DWELL = Quantum-dot-in-well
DWELL-QDIP = Quantum-dot-in-well quantum-dot infrared photodetector
e = Magnitude of electron charge [C]
е. = Unit vector in the x direction
Е = Electric-field complex amplitude [У - m~"]; also, Steady or slowly varying field [У - m~1]
Ex, = Local-oscillator electric-field complex amplitude [V - m~"]
Е, = Signal electric-field complex amplitude [У -m~"]
Е = Electric-field complex amplitude vector [У -m~*]
Е, = Electric-field complex amplitude vector within a scattering sphere [У - m~']
Е, = Scattered electric-field complex amplitude vector [V т]
Eo = Incident electric-field complex amplitude vector [У + m~1]
& = Electric field vector [У - m7]
E = Energy [J]; also, Radiant energy [J]
Ед = Acceptor energy level [J]; also, Activation energy [J]
Еъеат = Electron-beam energy in a free-electron laser [GeV]
Ес = Energy at the bottom of the conduction band [J]
Ep = Donor energy level [J]
Е; = Fermi energy [J]
Ес = Quasi-Fermi energy for the conduction band [J]
Er, = Quasi-Fermi energy for the valence band [J]
Е, = Bandgap energy [Л]
Е, = Kinetic energy [J]
Emax = Maximum kinetic energy [J]
E, = Rotational energy [J]
Е, = Energy at the top of the valence band [J]
Е, = Luminous energy [lm - s]
Е yar = Variational energy
E,, = Energy spectral density [J - Hz~*]
E-band = Extended optical fiber telecommunications band (1360-1460 nm)
EAM = Electroabsorption modulator
ECLD = External-cavity laser diode
EDFA = Erbium-doped fiber amplifier
e-e-o = Extraordinary-extraordinary-ordinary designations for waves 1, 2, and 3
EIT = Electromagnetically induced transparency
ELI = Extreme Light Infrastructure
E/O = Electronic-to-optical
e-o-e = Extraordinary-ordinary-extraordinary designations for waves 1, 2, and 3

1310 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
е-о-о = Extraordinary-ordinary-ordinary designations for waves 1, 2, and 3
EQE = External quantum efficiency
EUV = Extreme-ultraviolet, stretching from 10 to 100 nm
f = Focal length of a lens [m]; also, Frequency [Hz]; also, Frequency of sound [Hz]
f(E) = Fermi function
fa = Probability that absorption condition is satisfied
f-(E) = Fermi function for the conduction band
Ка = Collision rate [s~*]
f- = Probability that emission condition is satisfied
f, = Fermi inversion factor
(Е) = Fermi function for the valence band
f = Frequency of sound [Hz]; also, Modulation frequency [Hz]
f = Volume fraction of a homogeneous medium occupied by scatterers (filling ratio)
F = Focal point of an optical system; also, Excess noise factor of a photodetector
Fp = Purcell factor
Fy = F-number of a lens
F = Finesse of a resonator; also, Force [kg -m-s~?]
F, = Ponderomotive force [kg - m - s~?]
Е пк = Elements of the matrix Е
F = Hermitian matrix for generalized Helmholtz equation posed as an eigenvalue problem
FB = Fiber bundle
FBG = Fiber Bragg grating
FDM = Frequency-division multiplexing
FDMA = Frequency-division multiple access
FEL = Free-electron laser
FET = Field-effect transistor
FFT = Fast Fourier transform
FIR = Far infrared, stretching from 20 to 300 um
FM = Frequency-modulated
FON = Fiber-optic network
FPA = Focal-plane array
FPI = Fabry-Perot interferometer
FROG = Frequency-resolved optical gating
FSK = Frequency shift keying
FTIR = Frustrated total internal reflection
FUV = Far ultraviolet, stretching from 100 to 200 nm
FWHM = Full-width at half-maximum
FWM = Four-wave mixing
g = Resonator g-parameter; also, Gravitational acceleration constant at earth’s surface [m -s~?]
g(¥1, 2) = Normalized mutual intensity
g(¥1, 2,7) = Complex degree of coherence
g(v) = Lineshape function of a transition [Hz~1]
9(т) = Complex degree of temporal coherence
go = Gain factor
gvo(v) = Electron—photon collisionally broadened lineshape function in a semiconductor [Hz~*]
g = Coupling coefficient in a parametric interaction [m~ 3]
g = Fundamental spatial frequency of a periodic structure; also, Degeneracy parameter
9 = Primitive vector defining a reciprocal-lattice unit cell [m~*]

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1311
G = Gain of an amplifier; also, Gain of a photodetector; also, Conductance [9-1]
G(r1,r2) = Mutual intensity [W - m~?]
С (гу, г2, т) = Mutual coherence function [W - ш-?]
С (и) = Gain of an optical amplifier
G(r) = Temporal coherence function [W - m~?]
G(r) = Pulse-envelope autocorrelation function
G(r) = Intensity autocorrelation function [32 + т“.
Gr = Gain of a Raman amplifier
С = Coherency matrix [W - m~?]; also, Gyration vector of an optically active medium; also,
Wavevector of a phase grating [m~']
G = Photoionization rate in a photorefractive material
Со = Rate of thermal electron-hole generation in a semiconductor [m~? - s~1]
G = Reciprocal-lattice vector [m~*]
С,,(.) = Hermite—Gaussian function of order п
GB = Gain-bandwidth product [Hz]
GFP = Group-IV photonics; also, Green fluorescent protein
GR = Generation—recombination
GRIN = Graded-index
GVD = Group velocity dispersion
h = Complex round-trip amplitude attenuation factor in a resonator; also, Planck’s constant [J-s]
h(t) = Impulse response function of a linear system
h(x, у) = Impulse response function of a two-dimensional linear system
hp(t) = Photodetector impulse response function
h=h/2r [J -s]
H = Principal point of an optical system; also, Magnetic-field complex amplitude [A - m~*]
Н = Magnetic-field complex amplitude vector [А -m~*]
К = Magnetic field vector [A - m1]
H(v) = Transfer function of a linear system [H(f) for low-frequency signals]
H’(v) = Real part of the transfer function of a linear system
H"(v) = Imaginary part of the transfer function of a linear system
H(v,, Vy) = Transfer function of a two-dimensional linear system
H.(f) = Envelope transfer function of a linear system
Ho = Transfer-function magnitude
Hi? (.) = Hankel function of the first kind of order ¢
Н»(.) = Hermite polynomial of order n
H = Horizontal polarization
HAPLS = High-repetition-rate Advanced Petawatt Laser System
HD = High definition
HG = Hermite—Gaussian
HHG = High-harmonic generation
HNLF = Highly nonlinear fiber
HOE = Holographic optical element
НОМ = Hong—Ou—Mandel
HOMO = Highest occupied molecular orbital
HVPE = Hydride vapor-phase epitaxy
HXR = Hard-X-ray
i = Electric current [A]; also, Integer; also, y/—1
iq = Dark current [А]

1312 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
i. = Electron current [А]
in = Hole current [A]
ip = Photoelectric current (photocurrent) [A]
i, = Reverse current in a semiconductor p—n diode [A]
i, = Threshold current of a laser diode [A]
i = Transparency current for a laser-diode amplifier [A]
I = Optical intensity (also called Irradiance) [М - m~?]
I(t) = Intensity of an optical pulse [W - m~?]
Тр = Local-oscillator intensity [W - m~?]
Т, = Saturation optical intensity of an amplifier or absorber [W - m~?]; also, Acoustic intensity
[W - m~?]; also, Signal intensity [W - m~?]
I, = Optical intensity of a scattered wave [W - m~?]
I,, = Threshold intensity of a laser [W - m~?]
Т, = Spectral intensity [W -m~? - НИ
То = Optical intensity of an incident wave [W - m~?]
Ip(-) = Modified Bessel function of order zero
J = Fourier transform of intensity profile; also, Moment of inertia [kg - m?|
| = Identity matrix
I = In-phase component of the field
IC = Integrated circuit
ICL = Interband cascade laser
IEEE = Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IF = Intermediate frequency
IG = Ince—Gaussian
IM = Intensity modulation
IP = Internet protocol
IR = Infrared
IRE = Institute of Radio Engineers
ISI = Intersymbol interference
ITO = Indium tin oxide
ITU = International Telecommunications Union
j = V—1; also, Integer
J = Electric current density [A - m2]
J. = Electron current density [A - m~?]
Л, = Hole current density [A + m~?]
J¢(-) = Bessel function of the first kind of order 6
J, = Photoelectric current density [A -m~?]
J, = Threshold current density of a laser diode [A - m~?]
J = Transparency current density of a laser-diode amplifier [A - m~?]
J = Jones vector
д = Total angular-momentum quantum number
д = Electric current density vector [А -m7~?]
К = Wavenumber [m~?*]; also, Integer; also, Spatial angular frequency [rad - m~?]
k. = Complex effective wavenumber of a host medium with embedded scatterers [m7]
Ко = Free-space wavenumber [m~']
К. = Reflected wavenumber [m71]; also, Upshifted wavenumber of a Bragg-reflected wave
[m~"]
к, = Downshifted wavenumber of a Bragg-reflected wave [т- 1]

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1313
k, = Wavenumber inside a scattering medium [m~*]
kp = \/k2 + 2 = Transverse component of the wavevector [m~']
ky, ky = Wavevector components in x and у directions [m~*]; also, Spatial angular frequencies in x
and y directions [rad - m~1]
Ко = Central wavenumber [7 "]
К = Wavevector [m~']
К, = Grating wavevector [m~']
К, = Reflected wavevector [m~*]; also, Upshifted wavevector of a Bragg-reflected wave [m~"]
К, = Downshifted wavevector of a Bragg-reflected wave [m~']
k = Ionization ratio for an avalanche photodiode
К = Boltzmann’s constant [J - К!
К = Undulator (magnetic-deflection) parameter in a free-electron laser
К„(.) = Modified Bessel function of the second kind of order т
Ka = Designation of X-ray line arising from transition from п = 2 to n = 1 atomic shells
К = Bloch wavenumber [m~*]
К = Bloch wavevector [m~+]
KDP = Potassium dihydrogen phosphate
KGW = Potassium gadolinium tungstate
KTP = Potassium titanyl phosphate
KYW = Potassium yttrium tungstate
1 = Length [m]; also, Integer
1. = Coherence length [п]
¢ = Azimuthal quantum number
4 = Optical pathlength of the central frequency component of a pulse
L = Length [m]; also, Distance [m]; also, Electrical inductance [H]; also, Loss factor; also,
Number of incoming optical beams to an acousto-optic switch; also, Integer
L.. = Coherence length in a parametric interaction [п]
L, = Soliton—soliton interaction period [п]
L, = Luminance [cd - m~?]
Lo = 7/2C = Coupling length (transfer distance) in a directional coupler [п]
К = Linear operator
L = Orbital angular momentum quantum number
25+; = Term symbol for angular-momentum quantum numbers with LS coupling
L = Angular momentum [J . $]
L,,(-) = Laguerre polynomial of degree m
ПИ, (.) = Generalized Laguerre polynomial of degree ть, order J, and index (т, 1)
L-band = Long optical fiber telecommunications band (1565-1625 nm)
LBo = Bit-rate—distance product [km - Gb - s~4]
LAN = Local-area network
LANL = Los Alamos National Laboratory
LASER = Light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation
LaWS = Laser Weapon System (U.S. Navy)
LBO = Lithium triborate
LC = Liquid crystal
LCD = Liquid-crystal display
LCLS = Linac Coherent Light Source at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory operated by Stan-
ford University
LCP = Left-circularly polarized
LD = Laser diode

1314 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
LED = Light-emitting diode
LEP = Light-emitting polymer material
LG = Laguerre—Gaussian
LHS = Left-hand side
LIGO = Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
LINAC = Linear accelerator
LLNL = Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
LMA = Large mode-area
LO = Local oscillator
LP = Linearly polarized
LPE = Liquid-phase epitaxy
LSP = Localized surface plasmon (localized surface plasmon polariton)
LuAG = Lutetium aluminum garnet
LUMO = Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
LWFA = Laser wakefield acceleration
LWI = Lasing without inversion
LWIR = Long-wavelength infrared, stretching from 8 to 14 um
m = Mass of a particle [kg]; also, Free electron mass [kg]; also, Integer; also, Contrast or modu-
lation depth
т. = Effective mass of a conduction-band electron [kg]
My = Proton mass [kg]
m, = Reduced mass of an electron—hole pair in a semiconductor [kg]
My = Effective mass of a valence-band hole [kg]
то = Free electron mass [kg]
m = Magnetic dipole moment [A - m?]
m = Photon number; also, Photoelectron number
то = Photoelectron-number sensitivity of an optical receiver
m = Magnetic quantum number
M = Magnification in an image system; also, Number of modes; also, Magnetization density
complex amplitude [A - m7"); also, Number of harmonics; also, Integer
М, = Muminance [Lx]
М = Magnetization density complex amplitude vector [A - m~1]
М = Figure of merit indicating strength of acousto-optic effect in a material [m? - W~1]
М = Magnetization density vector [A -m7~"]
М = Mass of an atom or molecule [kg]
M(v) = Density of modes in a resonator [m~*-Hz~! for 3D resonator; m~+-Hz~* for 1D resonator]
М, = Reduced mass of an atom or molecule [kg]
M = Ray-transfer matrix; also, Wave-transfer matrix
М? = Factor representing deviation of optical-beam profile from Gaussian form
MAN = Metropolitan-area network
MBE = Molecular-beam epitaxy
MC = Mode converter
MCF = Multicore fiber
MCP = Microchannel plate
MEMS = Microelectromechanical system
MI = Michelson interferometer
MIM = Metal-insulator—metal
MIMO = Multiple-input multiple-output
MIR = Mid infrared, stretching from 2 to 20 wm

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1315
MIRACL = Mid-infrared advanced chemical laser
MIS = Metal-insulator—-semiconductor
MKS = Meter/kilogram/second unit system
MMF = Multimode fiber
MOCVD = Metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (same as MOVPE)
MOFA = Master-oscillator fiber-amplifier
MOPA = Master-oscillator power-amplifier
MOSFET = Metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor
MOT = Magneto-optical trap
MOVPE = Metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (same as MOCVD)
MPM = Multiphoton microscopy
MQD = Multiquantum dot
MQW = Multiquantum well
M-ROADM = Multi-degree reconfigurable optical add—drop multiplexer
MUV = Mid ultraviolet, stretching from 200 to 300 nm
MUX = Multiplexer
MWIR = Medium-wavelength infrared, stretching from 3 to 5 ит
МИ = Mach-Zehnder interferometer
MZM = Mach-Zehnder modulator
n = Refractive index; also, Integer
n(r) = Refractive index of an inhomogeneous medium
n(0) = Refractive index of extraordinary wave in a uniaxial crystal

Ny = Effective refractive index associated with SPP at metal—dielectric boundary

п. = Extraordinary refractive index

No = Ordinary refractive index

п» = Refractive index of a prism

ns = Refractive index of a scattering volume

nz = Optical Kerr coefficient (nonlinear refractive index) [m? - W~"]

п = Photon-number density [m~*]

п, = Saturation photon-number density [и 3]

n = Photon number
п = Mean photon number
п, = Spectral photon number [Hz~*]
по = Number-state photon number; also, Photon-number sensitivity of an optical receiver
n = Principal quantum number
п = Concentration of electrons in a semiconductor [m~3]

п; = Concentration of electrons/holes in an intrinsic semiconductor [m~3]

по = Equilibrium concentration of electrons in a semiconductor [т-3]

N = Group index; also, Integer; also, Number of atoms; also, Number of stages; also, Number of
optical cycles; also, Number of resolvable spots of a scanner; also, Order of a higher-order
soliton

Nr = Fresnel number
N = Number density [m~*]; also, № = М> — Ny = Population density difference [m~?]
№. = Atomic number density [m~°]
Na = Number density of ionized acceptor atoms in a semiconductor [m~3]
Np = Number density of ionized donor atoms in a semiconductor [m~*]; also, Number density of
donor atoms in a photorefractive material [173]
№ = Number density of ionized donor atoms in а photorefractive material [m~*]
№. = Number density of scatterers [m~°]

1316 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
М, = Laser threshold population difference [m3]
No = Steady-state population difference in the absence of amplifier radiation [п 3]
NA = Numerical aperture
NEA = Negative-electron-affinity
NEP = Noise-equivalent power
NIF = National Ignition Facility
NIM = Negative-index material
NIR = Near infrared, stretching from 0.760 to 2 um
NL = Nonlinear
NLDC = Nonlinear directional coupler
NOLM = Nonlinear optical loop mirror
NRI = Negative refractive index
NRZ = Non-return-to-zero
NUV = Near ultraviolet, stretching from 300 to 390 nm
NZ-DSF = Non-zero dispersion shifted fiber
O-band = Original optical fiber telecommunications band (1260-1360 nm)
OA = Optical amplifier
OADM = Optical add-drop multiplexer
OAM = Orbital angular momentum
OC = Optical carrier
OCT = Optical coherence tomography
ODMUX = Optical demultiplexer (also abbreviated as ODEMUX)
O/E = Optical-to-electronic
о-е-е = Ordinary-extraordinary-extraordinary designations for waves 1, 2, and 3
OEIC = Optoelectronic integrated circuit
o-e-o = Ordinary-extraordinary-ordinary designations for waves 1, 2, and 3
OEO = Optical-electrical-optical
OFA = Optical fiber amplifier
OFC = Optical frequency comb; also, Optical frequency conversion
OH = Hydroxyl radical
OLED = Organic light-emitting diode
OM = Optical mode
OMUX = Optical multiplexer
0-0-е = Ordinary-ordinary-extraordinary designations for waves 1, 2, and 3
OOK = ON-OFF keying
OPA = Optical parametric amplifier
OPC = Optical phase conjugation
OPCPA = Optical parametric chirped-pulse amplification
OPD = Organic photodetector
OPO = Optical parametric oscillator
OR = OR logic gate
OSA = Optical Society of America
OTDM = Optical time-division multiplexer
OXC = Optical cross-connect
р = Probability; also, Momentum [kg - m - s~1]; also, Graded-index fiber profile parameter
p(n) = Probability of n events
p(n) = Photon-number distribution
p(x, у) = Aperture function or pupil function

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1317
Pab = Probability density for absorption (mode containing one photon) [s~*]
р-р = Probability density for spontaneous emission (into one mode) [s~"]
Pst = Probability density for stimulated emission (mode containing one photon) [5—1]
р = Electric dipole moment [С - m]
p = Normalized electric-field quadrature component
p = Elasto-optic (strain-optic) coefficient
рим = Component of the photoelasticity tensor
Pre = Component of the photoelasticity tensor (contracted indices)
р = Concentration of holes in a semiconductor [73]
ро = Equilibrium concentration of holes in a semiconductor [m~°]
P = Electric polarization-density complex amplitude [С - m~?]; also, Probability of impact
ionization
P(v,, Vy) = Fourier transform of the aperture function p(x, у)
Р.ь = Probability density for absorption (mode containing many photons) [s~"]
Ре (.) = Microsphere-resonator adjoint Legendre function
Px, = Complex amplitude of the nonlinear component of the polarization density [С - m~?]
P.,, = Probability density for spontaneous emission (into any mode) [s~*]
P,, = Probability density for stimulated emission (mode containing many photons) [s~*]
P = Electric polarization-density complex amplitude vector [С - m~?]
> = Electric polarization density vector [С - m~?|
ФР, = Linear component of the polarization density [С - m~?]
Ра, = Nonlinear component of the polarization density [С -m7~?]
P = Optical power (also called Radiant power or Radiant flux) [W]
Р. = Electrical power [W]
Р; = Incident optical power [W]
Pr, = Local-oscillator power [W]
P, = Output optical power [W]; also, Average output optical power [W]
P, = Peak pulse power [W]
P, = Optical pump power [W]
P,. = Received optical power [W]
P, = Signal (optical) power [W]
P, = Optical power of a scattered wave [М]
P, = Threshold optical pump power [W]
P, = Luminous flux [lm]
P,, = Power spectral density [W - Hz~1]
P,, = Half-wave optical power in a Kerr medium [W]
P = Degree of polarization
P = Optical power [dBm]
Р. = Optical power loss associated with splicing and coupling [dBm]
Pi, = Optical power allotted for safety margin [dBm]
P, = Receiver optical power sensitivity [dBm]
P, = Source optical power [dBm]
PAL-SLM = Parallel aligned spatial light modulator
PBG = Photonic bandgap
PBS = Polarizing beamsplitter
PCB = Printed circuit board
PCF = Photonic-crystal fiber
PC-LED = Phosphor-conversion LED
PCM = Pulse code modulation
PD = Photodetector

1318 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
PDE = Photon detection efficiency
PET = Positron-emission tomography
PG-FROG = Polarization-gated frequency-resolved optical gating
PIC = Photonic integrated circuit
PIN = p-type—7-type—n-type photodiode
PLASER = Powder laser
PLC = Planar lightwave circuit
PLED = Polymer organic light-emitting diode
PM = Phase modulation
PMD = Polarization mode dispersion
PMT = Photomultiplier tube
P-OLED = Polymer light-emitting diode
PPLN = Periodically poled lithium niobate
PPV = Poly(p-phenylene vinylene)
PROM = Pockels readout optical modulator
PRR = Pulse repetition rate
PSK = Phase shift keying
PWFA = Plasma wakefield acceleration
PWM = Pulse-width modulation
q = Electric charge [С]; also, Wavenumber of an acoustic wave [m~*]; also, Integer (mode
index, diffraction order, quantum number); also, Spatial angular frequency [rad - m~']
q(z) = Complex Gaussian-beam parameter [п]
g = Quantum defect
а = Wavevector of an acoustic wave [m~1]
Q = Electric charge [C]; also, Quality factor of an optical resonator or a resonant circuit
©. = Absorption efficiency
Qs; = Scattering efficiency
Q = Quadrature component of the field
QAM = Quadrature amplitude modulation
QCL = Quantum cascade laser
QCSE = Quantum-confined Stark effect
QD = Quantum dot
QDIP = Quantum-dot infrared photodetector
QED = Quantum electrodynamics
QOCT = Quantum optical coherence tomography
QPM = Quasi-phase matching; also, Quadratic phase modulator
QPSK = Quaternary phase shift keying
QWIP = Quantum-well infrared photodetector
r = Radial distance in spherical and cylindrical coordinates [m]
т, = Кади of allowed electron orbits in Bohr atom [m]
г = Position vector [m]
т = Unit vector in radial direction in spherical coordinates
т = Complex amplitude reflectance; also, Complex round-trip amplitude attenuation factor in a
resonator
|r| = Magnitude of round-trip amplitude attenuation factor in a resonator
14 = Frequency-upshifted Bragg amplitude reflectance
т_ = Frequency-downshifted Bragg amplitude reflectance
r(v) = Rate of photon emission/absorption from a semiconductor [s~! - m~? - Hz~*]

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1319
г = Linear electro-optic (Pockels) coefficient [m - У 1}; also, Rotational quantum number
г/к = Component of the linear electro-optic (Pockels) tensor [m- vj
г/к = Component of the linear electro-optic (Pockels) tensor (contracted indices) [m - v4
r = Electron—-hole recombination coefficient [m? - s~*]
гиг = Nonradiative electron-hole recombination coefficient [m? . 81]
r, = Radiative electron-hole recombination coefficient [m? - s~*]
rect(-) = Pulse of unit height and unit width centered about 0
В = Radius of curvature [п]; also, Electrical resistance [0]
R(z) = Radius of curvature of a Gaussian beam [m]
В(т) = Field autocorrelation function
Ry = Load resistance [Q]
Rm = Distance from the focal point to the mth ring of a Fresnel zone plate [п]
Ro = Radius of cylinder in which a meridional ray is confined [m]
В/(9) = Jones matrix for coordinate rotation by an angle 9
R = Intensity or power reflectance; also, approximate reflectance of a Bragg reflector
Х. = Exact intensity or power reflectance of a Bragg reflector
К = Pumping rate [s~' - m~3]; also, Recombination rate in a semiconductor [s~! - m~¥3]; also,
Electron-hole injection rate in a semiconductor [s~! - m~3]
К, = Laser threshold pumping rate [s~! т-3]
R = Lattice vector [m]
К = Responsivity of a photon source [W-A~"]; also, Responsivity of a photon detector [A-W~*]
Ка = Differential responsivity of a laser diode [W - A~*]
Ве (г) = Hydrogen-atom associated Laguerre function of order @ and index п
R = Ratio of complex-envelope polarization-component magnitudes
RC = Resistor-capacitor combination
RC = Resonant-cavity
RCLED = Resonant-cavity light-emitting diode
RCP = Right-circularly polarized
REFA = Rare-earth-doped fiber amplifier
RF = Radio-frequency
RFA = Raman fiber amplifier
RFID = Radio-frequency identification
RFL = Raman fiber laser
RHS = Right-hand side
RMS = Root-mean square
ROADM = Reconfigurable optical add—drop multiplexer
RW = Ridge waveguide
Rx = Receiver
RZ = Return-to-zero
s = Length or distance [п]; also, Scale factor
s(x, t) = Strain wavefunction
5:} = Component of the strain tensor
s = Photorefractivity proportionality constant for photoionization cross section
5(г1,г2, и) = Normalized cross-spectral density
$ = Quadratic electro-optic (Kerr) coefficient [m? - V~?]; also, Spin quantum number
Sijkt = Component of the quadratic electro-optic (Kerr) tensor [2 . Vv?
згк = Component of the quadratic electro-optic (Kerr) tensor (contracted indices) [m? - V~?]
sinc(-) = Symmetric function with peak value of unity at 0 [sinc(t) = sin(t)/(zt)]
5 = Poynting-vector magnitude [W-m~?]; also, Transition strength (oscillator strength) [m?-Hz]

1320 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
S(r) = Complex amplitude for a radiation source [V - m~°]
S(-) = Fresnel integral
So = Strain amplitude
$ = Complex Poynting vector [W - m~?]
8(t) = Source of optical radiation created by an incident field [У - m~3]; also, Spin angular-
momentum quantum number
$ = Poynting vector [W - m~?]
S(r) = Eikonal [m]
S(r1,¥2,v) = Cross-spectral density [W -m-~? - Hz~1]
S(A.) = Wavelength power spectral density [W - m~*];
S(v) = Spectral intensity of an optical wave or pulse [W - m7? -Hz~+]; also, Power spectral density
[W-m-?- НИ
S(v,t) = Spectrogram of an optical pulse [S(v, t) = |®(v, t)|?]
S = Scattering matrix
$ = Projection of photon-spin angular momentum along the wavevector (helicity) [J - s]
$н = Stokes parameters
S-band = Short optical fiber telecommunications band (1460-1530 nm)
SACM = Separate absorption, charge, and multiplication
SAM = Separate absorption and multiplication
SAPD = Superlattice avalanche photodiode; also, Staircase avalanche photodiode
SASE = Self-amplified spontaneous emission
SBN = Strontium barium niobate
SBS = Stimulated Brillouin scattering
SCF = Single-core fiber
SCG = Supercontinuum generation
SCIDCM = Single-carrier-injection double-carrier multiplication
SCISCM = Single-carrier-injection single-carrier multiplication
SDH = Synchronous digital hierarchy
SDL = Semiconductor disk laser
SDM = Space-division multiplexing
SEED = Self-electro-optic-effect device
SESAM = Semiconductor saturable-absorber mirror
SFG = Sum-frequency generation
SGDFB = Sampled-grating distributed-feedback
SH = Second harmonic
SHG = Second-harmonic generation
SHG-FROG = Second-harmonic generation frequency-resolved optical gating
SI = International system of units; also, Step-index
SLA = Semiconductor laser amplifier
SLAC = National Accelerator Laboratory at Stanford University
SLED = Superluminescent diode
SLM = Spatial light modulator
SMD = Surface-mounted device
SMF = Single-mode fiber
SMOLED = Small-molecule organic light-emitting diode
SNG = Single-negative medium
SNOM = Scanning near-field optical microscopy
SNR = Signal-to-noise ratio
SNSPD = Superconducting nanowire single-photon detector
SOA = Semiconductor optical amplifier

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1321
SOI = Silicon-on-insulator
SONET = Synchronous optical network
SOS = Silica-on-silicon
SPAD = Single-photon avalanche diode
SPASER = Surface-plasmon amplification by stimulated emission of radiation
SPDC = Spontaneous parametric downconversion
SPE = Single-photon emitter
SPIE = The International Society for Optical Engineering
SPM = Self-phase modulation
SPP = Surface plasmon polariton
SPR = Surface plasmon resonance
SQUID = Superconducting quantum-interference device
SQW = Single quantum well
SRO = Singly resonant oscillator
SRS = Stimulated Raman scattering
SSFS = Soliton self-frequency shift
SSPD = Superconducting single-photon detector
STS = Synchronous transport signal
SVE = Slowly varying envelope
SXR = Soft-X-ray
+ = Time [3]
+; = Ionization time [3]
+. = Recombination time [3]
tsp = Spontaneous lifetime [s]; also, Effective spontaneous lifetime [s]
t = Complex amplitude transmittance; also, Normalized time for an optical pulse
T = Temperature [°K]
T = Jones matrix
J = Intensity or power transmittance; also, Power-transfer or power-transmission ratio
T = Transit time [s]; also, Counting time [s]; also, Switching time [s]; also, Bit time interval [$];
also, Resolution time (T = 1/2B where B = Bandwidth) [s]; also, Period of a wave
(T = 1/v where и = frequency) [$]; also, Transit time of sound across an optical beam
Tp = 1/vp = Inverse of Fabry—Perot resonator-mode frequency spacing (Тр = 2d/c) [3]; also, Period of
a mode-locked laser pulse train [s]
Tem = Element of transmission or interconnection matrix
То = Ground-state orbital period in Bohr hydrogen atom (То = 150 as) [s]
Т2 = Electron—phonon collision time [3]
T = Transmission matrix; also, Interconnection matrix
TADF = Thermally activated delayed fluorescence
TDM = Time-division multiplexing
TDMA = Time-division multiple access
TE = Transverse electric
TEM = Transverse electromagnetic
TES = Transition-edge sensor
TFF = Thin-film filter
TFT = Thin-film transistor
TGG = Terbium gallium garnet
THG = Third-harmonic generation
TIR = Total internal reflection
TM = Transverse magnetic

1322 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
TMD = Transition-metal dichalcogenide
TOAD = Terahertz optical asymmetric demultiplexer
TPD = Tripheny! diamine derivative
TPLSM = Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence microscopy
TSI = Time-slot interchange
TST = Time-space-time
TV = Television receiver
Tx = Transmitter
2PM = Two-photon microscopy
3PM = Three-photon microscopy
и = Displacement [m]
u(r, $) = Wavefunction of an optical wave
и = Unit vector
u = Number of electrons in a subshell
U(r) = Complex amplitude of a monochromatic optical wave
U(r,t) = Complex wavefunction of an optical wave
U(t) = Complex wavefunction of an optical pulse
U(t1,t2) = Joint temporal wavefunction for two-photon light
О (21,22) = Joint spatial wavefunction for two-photon light
0, (2) = Probability amplitude of location of maximally entangled photons
0. (г) = Complex amplitude of a scattered monochromatic optical wave
Оо(г) = Complex amplitude of an incident monochromatic optical wave
U(a) = Unit step function [U(x) = lif x > 0 and U(x) = Oif x < 0]
U-band = Ultra-long optical fiber telecommunications band (1625-1675 nm)
ULSI = Ultra-large-scale integration
UV = Ultraviolet
UVA = Ultraviolet-A band, stretching from 315 to 400 nm
UVB = Ultraviolet-B band, stretching from 280 to 315 nm
UVC = Ultraviolet-C band, stretching from 100 to 280 nm
v = Group velocity of a wave [m -s~1]
u(r, и) = Fourier transform of the wavefunction of an optical wave
Us = Velocity of sound [m-s~1]
у = Velocity of an atom or object [т - 3—1]; also, Drift velocity of a carrier [m - s~+]
Ve = Velocity of an electron [m-s~+]
м, = Velocity of a hole [m - s~1]
у = Velocity vector of a charge carrier [т - s~*]
v = Vibrational quantum number
У = Vertex; also, Volume [m*]; also, Modal volume [m?]; also, Voltage [У]
У (г, и) = Fourier transform of the complex wavefunction of an optical wave
V (Aj) = Photopic luminosity function (photopic luminous efficiency function)
V(v) = Fourier transform of the complex wavefunction of an optical pulse
V(™, V2) = Joint spectral wavefunction for two-photon light
V (v21,V22) = Joint wavevector wavefunction for two-photon light [kz] = 27v,1 and kz = 27vz2]
Ув = Battery voltage [V]
У. = Critical voltage for a liquid-crystal cell [V]
У, (к.) = Fourier transform of U,(x)
У, = Half-wave voltage of an electro-optic retarder or modulator [V]

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1323
Vo = Built-in potential difference in a p—n junction [V]; also, Switching voltage of a directional
coupler [V]
V = Visibility
V = Verdet constant [rad - m7! -T~+]
V = Fiber V parameter
V(r) = Potential energy [J]
У = Abbe number of a dispersive medium
V = Vertical polarization
VCSEL = Vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser
VECSEL = Vertical external-cavity surface-emitting laser
VLSI = Very-large-scale integration
VOx = Vanadium oxide
VPE = Vapor-phase epitaxy
VUV = Vacuum ultraviolet, stretching from 10 to 200 nm
w = Width [п]; also, Radius of a thin metallic rod [па]; also, Length of an acousto-optic cell [п]
w = Integrated photon flux (integrated optical power in units of photon number)
Wa = Width of the absorption region in an avalanche photodiode [пт]
Wn = Width of the multiplication region in an avalanche photodiode [п]
W = Time-averaged electromagnetic energy density [J - m~3]
И’ (t) = Window function; also, Window function for short-time Fourier transform
W (z) = Width (radius) of a Gaussian beam at an axial distance z from the beam center [m]
Wo = Waist radius of a Gaussian beam [m]
W = Electromagnetic energy density [J - шт 3]
W = Probability density for absorption of pump light [s~*]
W; = Probability density for absorption and stimulated emission [371]
W = Ionization energy of an atom [J]; also, Photoelectric work function [J]
WAN = Wide-area network
WC = Wavelength converter
WCI = Wavelength-channel interchange
WDM = Wavelength-division multiplexing
WDMA = Wavelength-division multiple access
WG = Waveguide
WGM = Whispering-gallery mode
WGR = Waveguide grating router
WKB = Wentzel—Kramers—Brillouin
WLAN = Wireless local-area network
WOLED = White organic light-emitting diode
WPE = Wall-plug efficiency
WSS = Wavelength-selective switch
x = Position coordinate {m]; also, Displacement [п]
Хх = Unit vector in the 2 direction in Cartesian coordinates
x(t) = Inverse Fourier transform of the susceptibility of a dispersive medium y(v)
x = Normalized electric-field quadrature component
X = Normalized photon-flux density at the input to an optical amplifier
X = Input vector to a linear system
X, = Eigenvectors associated with an eigenvalue problem
(и) = Real function associated with the Hermite-Gaussian beam
(2) (илл, w2) = Second-order nonlinear susceptibility

1324 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
X(-) = Normalized rate of change of the radial distribution in the core of a step-index fiber
XC = Cross-connect
XGM = Cross-gain modulation
XOR = Exclusive OR gate
XPM = Cross-phase modulation
XUV = Extreme ultraviolet
y = Position coordinate [п]
у = Unit vector in the у direction in Cartesian coordinates
У = Normalized photon-flux density at the output of an optical amplifier
У = Output vector from a linear system
Y(v) = Real function associated with the Hermite—Gaussian beam
Y(-) = Normalized rate of change of the radial distribution in the cladding of a step-index fiber
YAG = Yttrium aluminum garnet
YIG = Yttrium iron garnet
YLF = Yttrium lithium fluoride
z = Position coordinate (Cartesian or cylindrical coordinates) [п]
Zmin = Location of the minimum width for a chirped Gaussian pulse [п]
Zui = Nonlinear characteristic length of a Kerr medium [m]
Zp = Soliton period [m]
2т = Talbot distance [п]
2 = Rayleigh range of a Gaussian beam [m]
|zo| = Dispersion length of a Gaussian pulse traveling through a dispersive medium [п]
Z = Unit vector in the z direction in Cartesian coordinates
z = Normalized distance for an optical pulse
Z = Atomic number; also, Electrical-circuit impedance [0]
Z(-) = Real function associated with the Hermite-Gaussian beam
Greek Symbols
а = Apex angle of a prism; also, Twist coefficient of a twisted nematic liquid crystal [m~"];
also, Attenuation or absorption coefficient [m~+]; also, Intensity extinction coefficient: a =
Qa + Os [m~+); also, Linewidth-enhancement factor for a laser diode
a, = Absorption coefficient of a scattering material [m~*]
а, = Electron ionization coefficient in a semiconductor [m~*]
ак, = Hole ionization coefficient in a semiconductor [m~*]
ат = Loss coefficient of a resonator attributed to a mirror [m~"]
ар = Mean value of р for a coherent state
a, = Effective overall distributed loss coefficient [m~*]
as = Loss coefficient of a laser medium [m~*]
а, = Scattering coefficient [m~"]
a, = Mean value of x for a coherent state
a, = Angular dispersion coefficient [Hz~*]
a = Attenuation coefficient of an optical fiber [dB/km]
в =k, = Propagation constant [m~1]; also, Phase-retardation coefficient of a twisted nematic
liquid crystal [m~*]
В’ = First derivative of В with respect to w [m7 - s]
В" = Second derivative of В with respect to w [m~! - s?|
B(v) = Propagation constant in a dispersive medium [m~"]

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1325
Во = B(vo) = Propagation constant at the central frequency м [m~*]
В = Spontaneous-emission coupling coefficient
у = Field attenuation coefficient [m~']; also, Field extinction coefficient [m~*]; also, Lateral
decay coefficient in a waveguide [m~*]; also, Lorentz factor in special relativity (у =
[1 — (v/c)?]~”); also, Coupling coefficient in a parametric device [m~*]; also, Nonlinear
coefficient in soliton theory
-ь = Amplitude attenuation coefficient of a traveling surface plasmon polariton [m~1]
в = Magnetogyration coefficient [m? - Wb~1]
‘Ym = Field extinction coefficient of an evanescent wave [m~"]
Yr = Photorefractivity recombination-rate coefficient
у = Gain coefficient of an optical amplifier [m~"]
y(v) = Gain coefficient of an optical amplifier [m~*]
Ym = Maximum gain coefficient of a quantum-well laser-diode amplifier [m~1]
у» = Peak gain coefficient of a laser-diode amplifier [m~*]
Ye = Raman gain coefficient [m~*]
ув(и) = Gain coefficient of a subset of atoms [m~*]
Yo(v) = Small-signal gain coefficient of an optical amplifier [m~"]
Г = Phase retardation; also, Power confinement factor in a laser diode or waveguide photodiode;
also, Crystallographic symbol for irreducible Brillouin zone
Г» = Power confinement factor in a waveguide
д = Secondary-emission gain random variable
6(.) = Delta function or impulse function
da = Increment of x
60 = Angular divergence of an optical beam
60, = Angular divergence of an acoustic beam
dv = Spectral width of a resonator mode [Hz]
A = Thickness of a thin optical component [п]; also, Fractional refractive-index change in an
optical fiber or waveguide (A = (п1 — п2)/п1)
An = Concentration of excess electron-hole pairs [m~°]
Арт = Concentration of injected carriers for a semiconductor optical amplifier at transparency
[m~"]
Ax = Increment of x
Av = Spectral width or linewidth [Hz]; also, Atomic linewidth or transition linewidth [Hz]
Av, = 1/т. = Spectral width [Hz]
Avy = Doppler linewidth [Hz]
Дирунм = Full-width-at-half-maximum spectral width [Hz]
Av, = Laser linewidth [Hz]
Av, = Linewidth of a saturated amplifier [Hz]
Avs, = Schawlow—Townes minimum laser linewidth [Hz]
с = Electric permittivity of a medium [Е - m~*]; also, Focusing error [m~']
e’ = Real part of the electric permittivity of a medium [F -m~1]
с” = Imaginary part of the electric permittivity of a medium [Е - m~*]
сь = Effective permittivity associated with SPP at metal—dielectric boundary [Е -m~*]
ес = Effective permittivity of a conductive medium [Е + m71]
ва = Electric permittivity of the dielectric medium in a layered metamaterial [Е -m~*]
ее = Effective permittivity of a host medium with embedded objects [Е - m~"]
е;; = Component of the electric permittivity tensor [F - m~1]
€m = Electric permittivity of the metallic medium in a layered metamaterial [Е - m~"]

1326 SYMBOLS AND UNITS
ео = Electric permittivity of free space [F - m7]
€, = Relative permittivity or dielectric constant
с; = Electric permittivity of a scattering volume [Е - m~*]
е = Electric permittivity tensor [F -m~1]
¢(z) = Excess axial phase of a Gaussian beam; also, Fraction of electron-hole pairs that success-
fully contribute to detector photocurrent
© = Damping coefficient of a harmonic oscillator [s~‘]; also, Scattering rate or collision fre-
quency (© = 1/7 where т = scattering time or collision time) [3—1]
7 = Impedance of a dielectric medium [{]; also, Photodetector quantum efficiency; also, Photon
detection efficiency
Nc = Power-conversion efficiency (also called Overall efficiency and Wall-plug efficiency)
па = External differential quantum efficiency
ne = Extraction efficiency; also, Transmission efficiency
Nex = External efficiency
7; = Internal quantum efficiency
No = Impedance of free space [©]
No = Optical-to-optical efficiency
Norc = Optical frequency conversion efficiency
ns = Differential power-conversion efficiency (also called Slope efficiency)
Ns = Optical-to-optical slope efficiency
зна = Second-harmonic generation efficiency
п = Electric impermeability
Nij = Component of the electric impermeability tensor
п = Electric impermeability tensor
9 = Angle; also, Twist angle in a liquid crystal; also, Deflection angle of a prism
0 = 90° — 9 = Complement of angle 9
9. = Acceptance angle
9в = Brewster angle
03 = Bragg angle
9. = Critical angle
9. = Complementary critical angle
04 = Deflection angle of a prism
Omax = Maximum angle
6,, = Angle of incidence of a ray at the surface of a prism from its interior
9,. = Angle of reflection
9: = Deviation angle of maximum spatial frequency; also, Angle subtended by a source
0) = Divergence angle of a Gaussian beam
6 = Unit vector in polar direction in spherical coordinates
9 = Threshold
Oem (9) = Hydrogen-atom associated Legendre function
к = Elastic constant of a harmonic oscillator [J - m~?]
A = Wavelength [п]
Ад = Long-wavelength limit [п]; also, Activation wavelength [п]
Ас = Cutoff wavelength [m]
Ак = Wavelength spacing of adjacent Fabry—Perot resonator modes [п]

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1327
Are, = Wavelength of light emitted by a free-electron laser [п]
Ag = Bandgap wavelength (long-wavelength limit) of a semiconductor [п]
Ло = Free-space wavelength [m]
А» = Plasma wavelength of a metal [m]
Ap = Wavelength of maximum blackbody energy density [m]; also, Peak wavelength [п]
Aq = Eigenvalues associated with an eigenvalue problem
Azp = Zero-dispersion wavelength of a medium [п]
Ло = Central wavelength [п]
Лав = de Broglie wavelength [п]
A = Spatial period of a grating or periodic structure [m]; also, Wavelength of acoustic wave [п]
Л. = Spatial period of undulator in a free-electron laser [m]
и = Magnetic permeability of a medium [H - m~']; also, Carrier mobility in a semiconductor
[m? -s~! - V~+]; also, Mean of a random variable
и’ = Real part of the magnetic permeability of a medium [Н - т]
и" = Imaginary part of the magnetic permeability of a medium [H - m~*]
ис = Effective magnetic permeability of a host medium with embedded objects [H - m~*]
ие = Electron mobility [m?-s~!-V~+]
иь = Hole mobility [m2 -s~! - V~+]
и; = Component of the magnetic permeability tensor [H - m~*]
Ио = Magnetic permeability of free space [H - m~1]
и = Magnetic permeability tensor [H - m~+]
и = Frequency [Hz]; also, Spatial frequency [m~*]
Vv, = Anti-Stokes-shifted frequency [Hz]
Vg = Brillouin frequency [Hz]
ив = Bragg frequency [Hz]
и, = Cutoff frequency [Hz]
Vp = Frequency spacing between adjacent Fabry—Perot modes (free spectral range) [Hz]
и; = Offset frequency for an optical frequency comb [Hz]
и = Instantaneous frequency [Hz]
Vp, = Pump frequency [Hz]
и, = Frequency of maximum blackbody energy density [Hz]; also, Peak frequency of electrolu-
minescence spectrum [Hz]
и, = Frequency of mode g [Hz]
Vz = Raman frequency [Hz]
и, = Spatial bandwidth of an imaging system [m~']; also, Signal frequency [Hz]; also, Laser
frequency [Hz]
Vs = Stokes-shifted frequency [Hz]
и, и, = Spatial frequencies in the x and у directions [m~']
Vo = Central frequency [Hz]
V, = Radial component of the spatial frequency: v, = \/v2 + v2 [m~"]
€ = Coupling coefficient in four-wave mixing
&р(и) = Amplifier noise photon-flux density per unit length [m~° - s~]
р = Rotatory power of an optically active medium [m7]; also, Resistivity [Q - из]; also, р =
\/=2 + у? = radial distance in a cylindrical coordinate system [п]
Pc = Coherence distance [п]
Pm = Radius of the center of the mth ring of a Fresnel zone plate [m]

1328 SYMBOLS AND UNITS

Ps = Radius of the Airy disk [п]; also, Radius of the blur spot of an imaging system {m]

о = Mass density of a medium [kg - m~3]; also, Charge density [С - m~*]; also, Retardance of
a birefringent medium [п]

o(k) = Wavenumber density of states [m~?]

o(v) = Spectral energy density [J -m~? - Ня” "|; also, Optical joint density of states [m~? - Hz~1]
0-(E) = Density of states near the conduction band edge [m~° - J~! in a bulk semiconductor]
0v(E) = Density of states near the valence band edge [m~° - J~+ in a bulk semiconductor]

o(v) = Normalized Lorentzian cavity mode [Hz~*]

o = Conductivity [Q-' - m~1}

o(v) = Transition cross section [m?]

@(v) = Average transition cross section [m7]

о. = Absorption cross section [m?]
Cab = Effective transition cross section for absorption [m?]

Oem = Effective transition cross section for emission [m7]

of = Transfer-function bandwidth [Hz]

Omax = Maximum transition cross section {m?]

оа = Circuit-noise parameter
о, = Circuit-noise current RMS value [А]
о. = Scattering cross section [m?]
oO, = Standard deviation of a random variable x; RMS width of a function of x
о? = Variance of a random variable x
09 = (№) = Transition cross section at the central frequency № [m?]
со = Conductivity at low frequencies [Q~1 - m~1]
ох = Spectral width [п]
o, = Temporal width [s]

o = Conductivity tensor [071 - m7]

т = Lifetime [$]; also, Decay time [s]; also, Pulse width [s]; also, Relaxation time [3]; also,
Scattering time [s]; also, Collision time [3]; also, Width of a function of time [s]; also,
Excess-carrier electron-hole recombination lifetime in a semiconductor [$]

тс = Coherence time [s]

Teo. = Mean time between collisions [s]

та = Delay time [5]

те = Electron transit time [3]

T = Hole transit time [3]

Tm = Multiplication time in an avalanche photodiode [3]
Tr = Nonradiative electron-hole recombination lifetime [$]

Tp = Resonator photon lifetime [s]

Tpulse = Duration of a mode-locked optical pulse [3]

т, = Radiative electron-hole recombination lifetime [s]

Tr = Receiver-circuit time constant [s]
Tro = RC time constant [3]

т, = Saturation time constant of a laser transition [s]

721 = Lifetime of a transition between energy levels 2 and 1 [3]

ф = Angle in a cylindrical or spherical coordinate system; also, Photon-flux density [m~? - s~*]

ф(р) = Particle momentum wavefunction [51/2 . kg~1/? « m~1/?]

ф(р) = Wavefunction for р quadrature component of the electric field
¢,(v) = Saturation photon-flux density [m~? - s~]

SYMBOLS AND UNITS 1329
фь = Spectral photon-flux density [m~? - s~! - Hz~1]
ф = Unit vector in azimuthal direction in spherical coordinates
y = Phase or phase difference or phase shift
p(t) = Phase of the complex envelope of an optical pulse
yp(v) = Phase-shift coefficient of an optical amplifier [m~*]
yr = Local-oscillator phase
ро = Phase shift from reflection at a resonator mirror
Ф = Photon flux [s~*]
®(v,7) = Short-time Fourier transform; also, Wigner distribution function
®,,(¢) = Hydrogen-atom harmonic function
®,, = Spectral photon flux [s~! - Hz~+]
x = Electric susceptibility; also, Electron affinity [J]
x’ = Real part of the electric susceptibility х
x’ = Imaginary part of the electric susceptibility х
x(v) = Electric susceptibility of a dispersive medium
Xe = Effective electric susceptibility
Xij = Component of the electric susceptibility tensor
Xm = Electric susceptibility of a metal at high frequencies (w >> wy)
x) = Coefficient of third-order optical nonlinearity [(C-m-V-3]
хе = Component of the third-order optical nonlinearity tensor [С - m - V~3]
xi? = Imaginary part of the nonlinear third-order susceptibility y‘°)
x2 = Component of the third-order optical nonlinearity tensor (contracted indices) [С - m - V~3]
xe ) = Real part of the nonlinear third-order susceptibility х(3)
х = Polarization-ellipse angle of ellipticity
х = Electric susceptibility tensor
р = Normalized amplitude of an optical pulse
w(r,t) = Particle wavefunction [m~3/? . s~1/?]
w(a) = Particle position wavefunction [m~!/?]
w(x) = Wavefunction for x quadrature component of the electric field
w(v) = Spectral phase of an optical pulse
i = Polarization-ellipse orientation of major axis
W(E€) = Nonlinear polarization density [С - m~?]
У. (Г) = Envelope transfer function phase
w = Angular frequency [rad - s~*]
ws = Bragg angular frequency [rad - s~*]
ал = Instantaneous angular frequency [rad - s~1]
ит = Heterodyne intermediate (angular) frequency [rad - s~*]
wz, = Local-oscillator frequency [rad - s~+]
аз, = Plasma frequency of a metal [rad - s~*]; also, Pump angular frequency [rad - s~"]
w, = Upshifted angular frequency of a Bragg-reflected wave [rad - s~1]
ws = Downshifted angular frequency of a Bragg-reflected wave [rad - s~*]; also, Angular fre-
quency below which a surface plasmon polariton can exist [rad-s~*]; also, Signal frequency
Гааз
wg = Central angular frequency [rad -3`\|; also, Localized surface plasmon resonance frequency
frad-s~1]
Q = Angular frequency of an acoustic wave [rad - s~"]; also, Angular frequency of a harmonic
electric signal [rad - s~1]; also, Solid angle [sr]

1330 — SYMBOLS AND UNITS
Mathematical Symbols
= = Result decreased to the nearest integer
= = Result increased to the nearest integer
4е {.} = Determinant of a matrix
Tr{-} = Trace of a matrix
{-}" = Transpose of a matrix
{-}~1! = Inverse of a matrix
x = Mean of the quantity x
(x) = Ensemble average over х
d = Differential
O = Partial differential
V_ = Gradient operator
\У. = Divergence operator
Vx = Curl operator
У? = Laplacian operator (У? = 02/05? + 0? /ду? + 0? /0=? in Cartesian coordinates)
V2, = Transverse Laplacian operator (V7 = 02/05? + 0?/Oy? in Cartesian coordinates)

a
===> Bahaa Е. А. Saleh has been Distinguished Professor and Dean

“4 ' of CREOL, The College of Optics and Photonics at the Univer-

= у sity of Central Florida, since 2009. He was at Boston University

i №. in 1994-2008, serving as Chair of the Department of Electrical

Г -= МЫ and Computer Engineering (ECE) in 1994—2007, and becoming

7 = Professor Emeritus in 2008. He received the Ph.D. degree from

- the Johns Hopkins University in 1971 and was a faculty member

at the University of Wisconsin-Madison from 1977 to 1994,

serving as Chair of the ECE Department from 1990 to 1994. He

= held faculty and research positions at the University of Santa

~ Catarina in Brazil, Kuwait University, the Max Planck Institute

in Germany, the University of California-Berkeley, the European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Columbia University, and the University of Vienna.

His research contributions cover a broad spectrum of topics in optics and photonics
including statistical optics, nonlinear optics, quantum optics, and image science. He
is the author of Photoelectron Statistics (Springer-Verlag, 1978) and the co-author of
Fundamentals of Photonics (Wiley, First Edition 1991, Second Edition 2007, Third
Edition 2019) and Introduction to Subsurface Imaging (Cambridge University Press,
2011). He has published more than 600 papers in technical journals and conference
proceedings. He holds nine patents.

Saleh served as the founding editor of the OSA journal Advances in Optics and Pho-
tonics (2008—2013), editor-in-chief of the Journal of the Optical Society of America A
(1991-1997), and Chairman of the Board of Editors of OSA (1997-2001). He served as
Vice President of the International Commission of Optics (ICO) (2000-2002), and as
a member of the Board of Directors of the Laser Institute of America (2010-2011). He
is a Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Optical
Society of America (OSA), the International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE),
the American Physical Society (APS), and the Guggenheim Foundation. He received
the 1999 OSA Beller Medal for outstanding contributions to optical science and en-
gineering education, the 2004 SPIE BACUS award for his contribution to photomask
technology, the 2006 Kuwait Prize, the 2008 OSA Distinguished Service Award, and
the 2013 OSA Mees Medal. He is a member of Phi Beta Kappa, Sigma Xi, and Tau
Beta Pi.

Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition. Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich.
©2019 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2019 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1331

1332 AUTHORS
i Malvin Carl Teich received the S.B. degree in physics from the
Sak Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1961, the M.S. degree
in electrical engineering from Stanford University in 1962, and
`- , the Ph.D. degree from Cornell University in 1966. His first pro-

’ oo = fessional affiliation, in 1966, was with MIT Lincoln Laboratory.

А . . He joined the faculty at Columbia University in 1967, where

S | he served as a member of the Electrical Engineering Depart-

м ment (as Chairman from 1978 to 1980), the Applied Physics

\ " and Applied Mathematics Department, the Columbia Radia-

р ry | tion Laboratory in the Department of Physics, and the Fowler

Memorial Laboratory at the Columbia College of Physicians

& Surgeons. During his tenure at Columbia, he carried out research in the areas of

photon statistics and point processes; quantum heterodyne detection; the generation

of nonclassical light; noise in avalanche photodiodes and fiber-optic amplifiers; and

information transmission in biological sensory systems. In 1996 he became Professor
Emeritus at Columbia.

From 1995 to 2011, he served as a faculty member at Boston University in the
Departments of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, and
Physics. He was the Director of the Quantum Photonics Laboratory and a Member
of the Photonics Center, the Hearing Research Center, and the Graduate Program for
Neuroscience. In 2011, he was appointed Professor Emeritus at Boston University.

Since 2011, Dr. Teich has been pursuing his research interests as Professor Emeritus
at Columbia University and Boston University, and as a member of the Boston Univer-
sity Photonics Center. He is also a consultant to government and private industry and
has served as an expert in numerous patent conflict cases. He is most widely known for
his work in photonics and for his studies of fractal stochastic processes and information
transmission in biological systems. His current efforts in photonics are directed toward
the characterization of noise in photon streams. His work in fractals focuses on eluci-
dating the information-carrying properties of sensory-system action-potential patterns
and the nature of heart-rate variability in patients with coronary disorders. His efforts
in neuroscience are directed toward auditory and visual perception, neural information
transmission, and sensory detection. During periods of sabbatical leave, he served as
a visiting faculty member at the University of Colorado at Boulder, the University of
California at San Diego, and the University of Central Florida at Orlando.

Dr. Teich is a Life Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE), and a Fellow of the Optical Society of America (OSA), the International
Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE), the American Physical Society (APS), the
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), and the Acoustical
Society of America (ASA). He is a member of Sigma Xi and Tau Beta Pi. In 1969
he received the IEEE Browder J. Thompson Memorial Prize for his paper “Infrared
Heterodyne Detection.” He was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1973. In 1992
he was honored with the Memorial Gold Medal of Palacky University in the Czech
Republic, and in 1997 he received the IEEE Morris E. Leeds Award. In 2009, he
was honored with the Distinguished Scholar Award of Boston University. He has
authored or coauthored some 350 refereed journal articles/book chapters and some
550 conference presentations/lectures; he holds six patents. He is the co-author of
Fundamentals of Photonics (Wiley, First Edition 1991, Second Edition 2007, Third
Edition 2019) and of Fractal-Based Point Processes (Wiley, 2005, with S. B. Lowen).

ee
k surface Bragg angle, 948
anisotropic medium, 234—237 Bragg condition, 948
ABCD Bragg condition tolerance, 949
inverse ray-transfer matrix, 31 Bragg diffraction, 945-958, 972, 973
law, 97—99 Bragg diffraction by beam, 956, 961
ray-transfer matrix, 28, 1302 Bragg diffraction by thin beam, 957
transmission matrix, 380 Bragg diffraction, downshifted, 952
wave-transfer matrix, 259, 1303 Bragg diffraction, upshifted, 949
g-parameters, 448 coupled-wave equations, 953, 954
q-parameter, 81, 97 Debye-Sears scattering, 957, 973
Doppler shift, 950
Absorption elasto-optic coefficient, 946
and scattering, 198—199 figure of merit, 946
atoms, 584, 589-593 index-ellipsoid modification, 970
coefficient, 182, 198, 777 introduction to, 944—945
coefficient in resonant medium, 189 Raman-—Nath scattering, 973
cross section, 199 reflectance, amplitude, 948
dielectric media, 181-184 reflectance, intensity, 950
efficiency, 199 scattering theory, 953, 973
indirect-bandgap semiconductor, 771 strain-optic coefficient, 946
left-handed media, 309 Airy
occupancy probability, 773 beam, 106-107
semiconductors, 769 beam generation, 107, 158
strong, 184 disk, 131
transition rate, 592, 775 formulas, 261
weak, 183 function, 107
Acceptance angle, 19, 25, 395 pattern, 131
Acousto-optic devices, 958—967 Amplified spontaneous emission (ASE),
acoustic spectrum analyzer, 963 651-653, 699, 821, 830
figure of merit, 973 Amplifier
filter, 966 Brillouin fiber, 644
frequency shifter, 967 chirped pulse, 1095
intensity modulator, 959, 973 electronic, 620, 621
intensity reflectance, 973 laser, 619-656, 659
interconnection capacity, 966 phase, 70
optical isolator, 967 phase-sensitive, 1062
reflector, 973 Raman fiber, 642—644
scanner, 961 reflection, 1065
spatial light modulator, 965 semiconductor, 817—831
switch, photonic, 959, 964, 1194 transmission, 1065
Acousto-optics, 943—974 Anharmonic oscillator, 1071-1073
anisotropic media, 967-971 Anisotropic media
Born approximation, 953, 973 К surface, 234—237
1333

1334 INDEX
acousto-optics of, 967-971 Fraunhofer, 124, 125, 130
arbitrary propagation, 232—233 Fresnel, 49, 121, 125, 130
biaxial crystal, 229 paraboloidal, 49
conductive, 882 paraxial, 9, 50
dispersion relation, 234—237 quasi-static, 196, 197
double refraction, 238—239, 254 quasi-stationary, 944
electro-optics of, 989-996 SVE, 51, 563, 954, 1050, 1064, 1086,
ellipsoid of revolution, 318 1111, 1127, 1133
energy transport, 234—237 Taylor-series, 10, 203, 1127
extraordinary refractive index, 229 Volterra-series, 1070
four-wave mixing, 1074 WKB, 407
gyration vector, 241 Array detectors, see Photodetectors
hyperbolic, 339-340, 352 Atoms
hyperboloid of revolution, 318 absorption, 584, 589-593
impermeability tensor, 230 atom amplifier, 602
index ellipsoid, 230, 232—233 atom chip, 602
liquid crystals, 244—246, 996-1005 atom interferometry, 601
magneto-optics, 242—243 atom optics, 601
magnetogyration coefficient, 243 atomic number, 564, 568
mixed-sign permittivities, 317, 352 Bose-Einstein condensate, 601
negative uniaxial crystal, 229 bosonic, 568, 602
negative-index, 338—339 Doppler cooling, 599
nonlinear and dispersive, 1073 electron configuration, 565, 566, 569
nonlinear optics of, 1066-1069 energy levels, 562
normal modes, 230, 232—233, 241 evaporative cooling, 600
normal surface, 234—237 fermionic, 568
optic axis, 229 Hartree method, 565
optical activity, 240-242 hydrogen, 564
optics of, 227—239 interaction with broadband light, 590
ordinary refractive index, 229 interaction with light, 583—602
permittivity tensor, 228 ionization energy, 568
photoelastic effect, 968 isotopes, 568
positive uniaxial crystal, 229 laser cooling, 599
principal axes, 229 laser trapping, 600
principal refractive indices, 229 lineshape function, 586
principal-axis propagation, 230-231 magnetic trap, 602
quadric representation, 229, 230, 317 magneto-optical trap, 601
rays, 234—237 matter waves, 601
refraction of rays, 239, 254 mononuclidic, 568
refractive indices of, 228—230 multielectron, 565—568
three-wave mixing, 1066-1069, 1073 optical lattices, 601
uniaxial crystal, 229, 233, 236, 317 optical molasses, 599
Verdet constant, 243 optical tweezers, 600
wavefronts, 234—237 Pauli exclusion principle, 565
Antenna periodic table, 566, 567
optical, 332-334 photon recoil, 524, 555, 600
plasmonic, 332-334 polarization gradient cooling, 600
Antibunching, photon, 780 relative atomic mass, 568
Antireflection coating, 264, 301 shells and subshells, 565
Aperture Sisyphus cooling, 600
function, 129, 138 spontaneous emission, 583, 587—588
ring, 67, 118, 159 spontaneous lifetime, 587, 588
Approximation spontaneous lifetime, effective, 589
Born, 192, 953, 973, 1020, 1076 stimulated emission, 585, 589-593

INDEX 1335
term symbol, 566, 569 elliptic Gaussian, 102, 109
transition strength, 586 elliptic Hermite—Gaussian, 102
Attenuation Gaussian, 51, 80-99
and scattering, 198, 416, 432 Hermite—Gaussian, 99-102, 105
coefficient, 182, 415-417 holographic generation, 155
optical fiber, 415—417 Ince—Gaussian, 105
Attosecond optics, 1141-1145 introduction to, 80
Auger recombination, 752, 821 Laguerre—Gaussian, 102—105, 155
Autocorrelation, 1288 nondiffracting, 57, 105, 136, 137
Avalanche photodiodes, 895-907 quality, 90
avalanche buildup time, 899 self-healing, 107
breakdown voltage, 901 toroidal, 103, 109
comparison with photodiodes, 927 vector, 179, 180
conventional (CAPD), 895 vortex, 104
dead space, 903 Beamsplitter, 13, 63, 301, 549
excess noise factor, 917-921 dielectric-slab, 268
gain, 896, 898, 940 phase shift, 64, 269
gain noise, 917—921 polarizing, 239, 247
Geiger-mode, 904 random partitioning, 539, 555
group-IV, 902 scattering matrix, 263
initial-energy effects, 903 single-photon transmittance, 522
ionization coefficients, 895 two-photon transmittance, 550
ionization ratio, 896 wave-transfer matrix, 263
materials, 901 Bell Laboratories, 1163
position-dependent gradients, 904 Bessel
position-dependent ionization, 904 -Gaussian beam, 106
punchthrough voltage, 901 beam, 57, 105, 136, 137
reach-through device, 899 beam vs. Gaussian beam, 106
response time, 899 function, 105, 131, 398, 467, 1295
responsivity, 898 Bessel, Friedrich Wilhelm, 79
SACM device, 899, 902 Bioluminescence, 608
SAM device, 899, 901, 902 Biprism, 14, 57
SCIDCM devices, 897, 917 Fresnel, 14, 57
SCISCM devices, 896 Bistability, optical
sick space, 903 amplifying NL element, 1218, 1219
single-photon (SPAD), 904 coupled microring lasers, 1219
Axicon, 14, 57, 106, 137 devices, 1216-1220
dispersive NL element, 1216, 1220
Band-structure engineering, 851 dissipative NL element, 1217
Bandgap embedded system, 1215
direct, 737 Fabry-Perot, nonlinear, 1217, 1218
energy, 576, 733, 738 hybrid, 1220
indirect, 737 hysteresis, 1211
wavelength, 738, 768 intrinsic system, 1215
Bardeen, John, 731 MZI, nonlinear, 1216, 1218
Basov, Nikolai G., 619 photonic logic, 1223
Beam, optical, 79-109 principles of, 1213-1215
accelerating, 107 quantum-confined Stark effect, 1220
Airy, 106-107, 158 saturable absorber, 1217
Bessel, 57, 105, 136, 137 self-electro-optic-effect device, 1220
Bessel—Gaussian, 106, 181 spatial light modulator, 1220
Bessel/Gaussian comparison, 106 systems, 1211
divergence-size tradeoff, 85, 106 Blackbody radiation, 602—607
donut, 103, 109 1D, 618, 923

1336 INDEX
2D, 617 chirp filter, 1099, 1161
spectrum, 604 distributed Bragg reflector, 269, 434,
correlated color temperature, 812 466, 471, 798
emission comparison, 617 fiber, 269, 687, 692
Rayleigh—Jeans formula, 463, 606 total reflection, 273
Stefan—Boltzmann law, 606, 618 waveguide, 385
thermal equilibrium, 602 Bragg, William Henry, 943
thermal light, 602 Bragg, William Lawrence, 943
thermography, 606 Brattain, Walter H., 731
Wien’s law, 617 Bremsstrahlung, 562
Bloch Brewster
modes, 257, 277—282, 295, 734, 1305 angle, 224, 225, 247, 253
phase, 281 window, 225
wavenumber, 278 Brillouin
Bloch, Felix, 255 fiber amplifier, 644
Bloembergen, Nicolaas, 1015 scattering, 613
Bohr zone, 278, 279, 283, 735, 738
atom, 564 zone, irreducible, 295
period, 564, 705 Bulk optics, 305, 354
radius, 564, 784
Bohr, Niels, 561 Catadioptric system, 15
Boltzmann distribution, 536, 581 Cathodoluminescence, 607, 608, 618
Bonding Caustic
covalent, 573, 576, 743 curve, 9, 17
ionic, 573, 576 surface, 397
metallic, 576 Characteristic equation
van der Waals, 573, 576, 743 optical fiber, 400
Born approximation Chemiluminescence, 608
for acousto-optics, 953, 973 Cherenkov radiation, 562, 875
for nonlinear optics, 1020 Chirp
for scattering, 192—193 coefficient, 1090
Born postulate, 563 coefficient, angular-dispersion, 1097
Born, Max, 473 coefficient, Bragg-grating, 1099
Bose-Einstein function, 1289
condensate, 601, 602 parameter, 1082
distribution, 536 pulse amplifier, 1095
Boson, 524, 537, 568 Chirp filter, 1088—1099
Boundary angular-dispersion, 1096
conditions, 164, 221 arbitrary phase filter, 1090
planar, 11 Bragg-grating, 1099, 1161
spherical, 14 cascaded, 1090
Bragg chirp coefficient, 1090
angle, 67, 270, 948 diffraction-grating, 1098
condition, 270, 948 envelope transfer function, 1088
condition, tolerance, 949 for compression, 1094
diffraction, 945-958, 972, 973 for expansion, 1094
diffraction by acoustic beam, 956, ideal filter, 1089
961 implementations of, 1095—1099
diffraction of optical beam, 955 impulse response function, 1090
diffraction, quantum view, 952 optical-fiber, 1103—1111, 1161
diffraction, Raman—Nath, 957 phase filter, 1089
frequency, 270 prism, 1097, 1105, 1161
reflection, 67 vs. quadratic-phase modulator, 1100
Bragg grating, 269—276, 698 Circular

INDEX 1337
dichroism, 254 degree of coherence, 483
polarization, 213, 253, 524 degree of temporal coherence, 478
Circulator, optical, 251, 1168, 1173 envelope, 47, 73, 80, 175, 211, 1080
CMOS technology, 375, 907, 909 representation, 45
scientific CMOS (sCMOS), 909 wavefunction, 45, 72
Coherence Conductive medium, 320-326
area, 485, 495 power reflectance, 321
coherent light, 62, 152, 474, 544 Conductivity, 320, 882
cross-spectral density, 486 tensor, 882
cross-spectral purity, 486 Constitutive relation, 166
degree of coherence, 483 Converter
degree of temporal coherence, 478 evanescent-to-propagating, 317
distance, 495, 505 frequency, 548, 610, 611, 1027, 1054
enhancement via filtering, 481, 489 incoherent-to-coherent, 989, 1005
extended radiator, 485 indistinguishable-to-entangled, 550
gain via propagation, 502 mode, 789, 1265
incoherent light, 485 space-to-time, 1119
introduction to, 474—475 wavelength, 1205
length, 479 Convolution, 1288, 1294, 1296, 1300
length, wave-mixing, 1032 Corkum, Paul B., 1078
longitudinal, 487 Correlation, 1288
mutual coherence function, 483 Coupled-wave theory
mutual intensity, 485, 498, 502, 549 acousto-optics, 953, 954
partial polarization, 506-510 four-wave mixing, 1059
power spectral density, 479 three-wave mixing, 1047, 1127
quantum, 483 waveguide, 378
quasi-monochromatic light, 485 Coupler
random wavepacket sequence, 482 prism, 329
role in interference, 489-496 Critical angle, 12, 223, 225, 310, 327
role in interferometry, 490, 493 complementary, 363
spatial, 483—487 Cross section
speckle, 406 absorption, 199
spectral density, 479 effective absorption, 585, 634
spectral width, 481 effective emission, 585, 634
temporal, 476-483 Fiichtbauer—Ladenburg equation, 588
temporal coherence function, 477 lineshape function, 586
time, 478 scattering, 195, 196
transmission, 497 transition, 584, 588, 634, 644
van Cittert—Zernike theorem, 503 transition strength, 586
Wiener—Khinchin theorem, 480 Cross-phase modulation, 1041, 1197
Wolf equations, 484 Crystal
Coherent biaxial, 229
anti-Stokes Raman scattering, 614 negative uniaxial, 229
detection, 74, 1266 positive uniaxial, 229
lidar, 75 structure, 294
optical amplifier, 620 symmetry, 991
Colladon, Jean-Daniel, 353 uniaxial, 229
Collimator, 9, 15 Cutoff frequency
Color-rendering index, 812, 816 waveguide, 359, 366
Comb, optical frequency, 721, 1141
applications, 722 Debye-Sears scattering, 973
Complex Degeneracy parameter, 582
amplitude, 46, 80 Delay, group, 200
analytic signal, 71 Detectors, see Photodetectors

1338 INDEX
Dichroism, 247 measures, 185
circular, 254 modal, 370, 389, 418, 1096
Dielectric multipath, 1096
boundary, reflection from, 53 nonlinear, 425, 1096
boundary, refraction at, 53 normal, 202
constant, 167 optical-fiber, 418—426
Diffraction, 129-136 polarization mode, 423, 1096
aperture function, 129 pulse propagation with, 199-203
Bragg, 945-958 spatial, 1096
circular aperture, 131 waveguide, 421, 1096
dispersion analogy, 1112 Dispersion relation
focused optical beam, 132 anisotropic medium, 234—237
Fraunhofer, 130-132, 158 photonic crystal, 282, 285, 296
Fresnel, 132—137, 158 waveguide, 359, 370
Gaussian aperture, 134 Dispersive medium
grating, 59, 78, 158 anisotropic and nonlinear, 1073
nondiffracting beams, 105-107 four-wave mixing, 1074
nondiffracting waves, 136 nonlinear optics of, 1069—1074
periodic aperture, 135 three-wave mixing, 1073, 1076, 1162
rectangular aperture, 130 Distributed Bragg reflector, 269, 434, 466,
single-photon, 523 471, 798
slit, 133 fiber, 687, 692, 720
Talbot effect, 135 laser, 843
two pinholes, 158 Doped dielectric media, 568—572
Diffusion equation, 1111, 1112 actinide metals, 572
Diode lasers, see Laser diodes lanthanide metals, 571, 572
Dipole transition metals, 569
electric, 177 Doppler
magnetic, 178 effect, 75
moment, 177, 178 radar, optical, 75
wave, 177, 194 shift, 950
Dirac equation, 565 Double refraction, 238—239, 254
Directional coupler, 381, 984 Double-slit experiment, 65, 493, 525
integrated-photonic, 986 Michelson stellar interferometer, 505
nonlinear, 1186 role of source size, 495
soliton router, 1187 role of spectral width, 495
Dispersion, 184—191 Downconversion, 1077
-compensating fiber, 423 Downconversion, parametric, 1027
-flattened fiber, 423 Drude model, 322—326, 388
-shifted fiber, 422 group velocity, 352
angular, 1096 simplified, 324—326
anomalous, 202 Drude, Paul Karl Ludwig, 303
chromatic, 422 Drude—Lorentz model, see Drude model
coefficient, 201, 202, 419
compensation, 685, 1110, 1111, 1254 Efficiency
diffraction analogy, 1112 absorption, 199
diffractive, 1096 differential power-conversion, 670
group velocity, 201, 207, 370, 425, external, 800
550, 1104 external differential, 836, 838
in multi-resonance medium, 204 extraction, 670, 838
interferometric, 1096 internal, 754, 796, 838
management, 1255 optical-to-optical, 671
material, 419, 1096 optical-to-optical slope, 671
material and modal, 420 overall, 670

INDEX 1339
photon detection, 876 energy density, 176
power-conversion, 670, 837, 838 Gaussian beam, 179
scattering, 196 in a medium, 163
slope, 670, 837 in absorptive medium, 181, 309-310
wall-plug, 670, 838 in anisotropic medium, 170
Eigenvalue problem, 220, 279, 563, 1301 in conductive medium, 320-326
Eikonal equation, 26, 52, 343, 407 in dielectric medium, 166-180
Einstein in dispersive medium, 170, 184, 199
A and B coefficients, 591 in double-negative medium, 308
postulates, 591 in double-positive medium, 308
Einstein, Albert, 515, 561, 871 in free space, 162
Electric in inhomogeneous medium, 168, 174
dipole, 177 in negative-index material, 314
dipole moment, 177 in nonlinear medium, 171
field, 162 in resonant medium, 186
field, internal, 196 in single-negative medium, 308
flux density, 163 intensity, 165, 172, 176
Electro-optic devices momentum, 165
directional coupler, 381, 984 monochromatic, 172—180
dynamic wave retarder, 980 plane wave, 175, 307
intensity modulator, 981, 995, 1014 power, 165, 172
interferometric photonic switch, 1192 Poynting vector, 165
liquid-crystal SLM, 1002-1005 scattered, 194, 196
phase modulator, 973, 979, 995, 1013, spherical wave, 177
1014 TEM wave, 175, 307
self-electro-optic-effect device, 1220 traveling standing, 207
spatial light modulator, 987-989 vector beam, 180
strain sensor, 1013 Electron configuration, 566
switch, 985 actinide metals, 569
Electro-optics, 975-1014 He, 566
anisotropic media, 989-996 lanthanide metals, 569
double refraction, 1014 Ne, 566, 701
index-ellipsoid modification, 989 Net, 701
introduction to, 976-977 Ne-like, 699
Kerr effect, 978, 994, 1037, 1077 Ni-like, 699
Pockels effect, 978, 991-994, 1024, rare-earth elements, 569
1077 transition metals, 569
principles of, 977-989 Electroweak theory, 515
Electroabsorption, 1010—1012 Elements
Franz—Keldysh effect, 1010 actinide metals, 569, 572
modulator, 1010, 1011 lanthanide metals, 569, 571
switch, 1010 periodic table, 566, 567
Electrochromism, 1009 rare-earth, 571, 682, 687
Electroluminescence, 608, 789 semiconductor, 686
injection, 609, 790 transition metals, 569, 745
Electromagnetic optics, 160-208 Energy
constitutive relation, 166 activation, 885
introduction to, 161-162 anisotropic transport, 234—237
material equation, 173 density, electromagnetic, 176
relation to wave optics, 180 electromagnetic, 165, 172
Electromagnetic wave optical, 44
amplitude-modulated, 207 photon, 518
dipole wave, 177, 194 Energy levels
energy, 165 alexandrite, 570

1340 INDEX
azimuthal quantum number, 564 Excess noise factor
bandgap energy, 576, 578, 733, 738 CAPD, 917, 920, 940
Bohr atom, 564 dark-noise, 921
Boltzmann distribution, 581 dead-space APD, 918
С5+, 564 definition, 911, 916
COz molecule, 574 modified, 920
conduction band, 576 photoconductive detector, 940
Cr?+ :crysoberyl, 570 PMT, 916, 920, 940
Cr?+ :sapphire, 570 position-dependent APD, 919
crystal-field theory, 570 relation to gain variance, 916
degeneracy, 572, 582 SACM APD, 918
diatomic molecules, rotating, 573 SAM APD, 918
diatomic molecules, vibrating, 573 SCIDCM CAPD, 940
dye molecule, 575 SCISCM CAPD, 940
Fermi—Dirac distribution, 582 staircase APD, 919-921
fine structure, 565 superlattice APD, 921
forbidden band, 576 Excitons
H, 564 bulk semiconductors, 767
He, 566 electroabsorption, 1010
hyperfine structure, 565 organic semiconductors, 784, 810
ionization energy, 568 quantum dots, 580, 850
ions, 568—572 quantum-confined, 779
lanthanide-ion manifolds, 572 Extinction
ligand field theory, 570 coefficient, field, 198, 311, 312, 368
magnetic quantum number, 564 coefficient, intensity, 198
manifold, 566, 572, 634, 683 coefficient, waveguide, 368
molecular, 573 ratio, 983
multielectron atoms, 565—568
Nd?+ :glass, 571, 595 Fabry, Charles, 433
Nd?+ :YAG, 571, 595 Fabry—Perot
Ne, 566 etalon, 69, 265—269, 471, 679, 728
occupation, 581 finesse, 69, 266, 441, 443
principal quantum number, 564 free spectral range, 267, 438, 446
quantum dots, 580 internal intensity, 68, 441
relativistic effects, 565 loss coefficient, 443
rotational quantum number, 573 loss factor, 443, 444
ruby, 570 losses, 440, 442—446
spin-orbit coupling, 565 modal spectral width, 442
Stark splitting, 568, 601, 1010 off-axis modes, 446
triatomic molecule, vibrating, 574 photon lifetime, 444, 471
valence band, 576 quality factor, 445
vibrational quantum number, 573 resonance frequencies, 437, 446
vibrational—rotational, 574 resonator, 69, 265, 436-446, 661
Zeeman splitting, 568, 599, 601 spectral width, 440

Etalon transmittance, 266—268
Fabry-Perot, 69, 265—269, 679, 728 Faraday

Evanescent wave effect, 242—243
amplified, 316 rotator, 250, 1173
at DPS-DPS boundary, 224 Fast light, 204
at DPS-SNG boundary, 310 Fermat’s principle
decay, 120, 146 maximum time, 38
nanolaser, 862 minimum time, 6
near-field imaging, 146 Fermat, Pierre de, 3
waveguide, 368 Fermi

INDEX 1341
-Dirac distribution, 582, 747 number of modes, 403, 410
energy, 582 numerical aperture, 19, 395
function, 582, 746 optimal index profile, 412
inversion factor, 777 photonic lantern, 414
level, 747, 748, 785 photonic-crystal, 426—428
tail, 748 polarization mode dispersion, 423
velocity, 744 polarization-maintaining, 406
Fermion, 524, 565, 568 power transmission ratio, 416
Dirac-, 744 propagation constant, 404, 411, 432
Fiber optics, 391-432 quasi-plane wave solutions, 407, 432
infrared, 429 second-harmonic generation, 1023
introduction to, 392—393 silica-glass, 392
Fiber, optical, 18, 19 single-mode, 392, 405
V parameter, 399 skewed ray, 394
absorption bands, 416 specialty, 429
acceptance angle, 19, 25, 395 SPM, 1130
attenuation, 415 step-index, 392—396, 398—405, 408
Bragg grating, 269, 687, 692, 720 waveguide, 392
characteristic equation, 400 waveguide dispersion, 421
chromatic dispersion, 422 Finesse, 69, 266, 441
cladding, 392 First-order optics, see Paraxial optics
communications, 1224—1286 Fluorescence, 609, 811
core, 392 fluorophore, 610
coupler, 414, 432 three-photon, 610
differential group delay, 423, 425 two-photon, 610
dispersion, 418—426 up-conversion, 610, 611
dispersion relation, 400 Focal length
dispersion-compensating, 423, 1110 arbitrary paraxial system, 31
dispersion-flattened, 423 cylindrical lens, 17
dispersion-shifted, 422 Fresnel zone plate, 67, 118
extrinsic absorption bands, 417 optical Kerr lens, 1039
fiber optics, 391-432 paraboloidal mirror, 9
fiber parameter, 399 pulse focusing system, 1110
grade-profile parameter, 396, 412 spherical lens, 16, 17
graded-index, 392, 396, 409, 432 spherical mirror, 11
group velocity, 404, 412, 432 time lens, 1113
guided rays, 393—397 Focal point
guided waves, 397-415 SELFOC lens, 24
holey, 256, 426-428 arbitrary paraxial system, 31
hybrid, 429 cylindrical lens, 346
infrared, 429 paraboloidal mirror, 8
introduction to fiber optics, 392—393 Four-wave mixing, 1042, 1059, 1074
material and modal dispersion, 420 degenerate, 1044, 1045
material dispersion, 419, 432 in supercontinuum generation, 1140
materials, 429—430 switch, photonic, 1199
meridional ray, 394 Fourier optics, 110-159
metamaterial, 428 amplitude modulation, 116
modal dispersion, 392, 418, 432 far-field Fourier transform, 124—126
mode cutoff, 402 Fourier transform via lens, 158, 549
modes, 400, 409, 432 free-space impulse response, 122
multicore, 413, 1263 free-space propagation, 113—123
multicore couplers, 413 free-space transfer function, 119, 316
multimode, 392 frequency modulation, 116
nonlinear dispersion, 425 Fresnel approximation, 120-121

1342 INDEX
Fresnel zone plate, 118 lens, 18
Huygens—Fresnel principle, 123 number, 50, 121, 125, 458
imaging, 117 reflection, 639, 797
impulse response function, 112 zone plate, 67, 118
introduction to, 111-112 Fresnel, Augustin-Jean, 210
optical Fourier transform, 124—128
periodic media, 286-289 Gabor, Dennis, 110
plane wave, 113 Gain
pulsed waves, 1117 amplifier, parametric, 1056
scanning, 117 amplifier, reflection, 1065
spatial frequency, 111 CAPD, 896
spatial frequency and angle, 113 conversion, 1271
spatial harmonic function, 113 laser amplifier, 623
spatial spectral analysis, 114 laser diode, 834
transfer function, 112 photoconductive detector, 884
Fourier transform Raman, 642, 1041
autocorrelation, 1288 saturated, 647, 649
circularly symmetric function, 1294 SCIDCM CAPD, 898, 940
convolution, 1288, 1294 SCISCM staircase APD, 940
correlation, 1288 secondary-emission, 916
far-field, 124—126 semiconductor optical amplifier, 818
one-dimensional, 1287—1293 Gain coefficient
optical, 124-128, 1118 amplifier, parametric, 1057
pairs, 1289 peak, 821, 832, 869
Parseval’s theorem, 914, 1288 quantum-well SOA, 828
properties, 1288, 1294 Raman, 1041
separable functions, 1294 saturated, 646, 649, 660
short-time, 1083 small-signal, 622, 660
spectroscopy, 491 SOA, 820
table, 1289 Gate, photonic logic, 1165, 1211
two-dimensional, 1293—1295 Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 79
using lens, 126-128, 158 Gaussian
window function, 1083 chirped pulse, 1084—1085
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste Joseph, 110 pulse, 1084, 1161
Franken, Peter, 1015 pulse, Gaussian-beam analogy, 1113
Franz—Keldysh effect, 1010 Gaussian beam, 51, 80-99
Fraunhofer М? factor, 90
approximation, 124 ABCD law, 97-99
diffraction, 130—132, 158, 1090 q-parameter, 81, 97
Fraunhofer, Josef von, 110 Bessel-beam comparison, 106
Frequency characterization, 88
-resolved optical gating, 1156 collimation, 95
beat, 74, 967, 1153, 1267 complex amplitude, 80-82, 123
conversion, 1027, 1054 complex envelope, 81
instantaneous, 1081 confocal parameter, 85
modulation, spatial, 116 depth of focus, 85
of light, 42 divergence angle, 85, 109
shifter, acousto-optic, 967 elliptic, 102, 109
Fresnel expansion, 95
approximation, 49, 120-121, 1118 focusing, 93, 109, 1122
biprism, 14, 57 Gaussian-pulse analogy, 1113
diffraction, 132—137, 158, 1090 Gaussian-pulsed, 1120
equations, 223, 253, 258 Gouy effect, 86
integrals, 134 intensity, 82

INDEX 1343
parameters, 89, 90, 108 velocity, fiber, 404, 412
paraxial approximation, 89 velocity, photonic crystal, 284
phase, 86 velocity, waveguide, 360, 370
power, 83 Group-IV photonics, 737, 743
properties, 82-91, 451 2D materials, 745, 780
pulsed, 1087 allotropes, 743
quality, 90 array detector, 909
radius of curvature, 86 avalanche photodiode, 902
Rayleigh range, 81 GeSn-on-Si laser, 860
reflection from spherical mirror, 96 graphene photonics, 719, 744
relaying, 94 microcavity laser, 859
shaping, 93 photodiode, 892
single-photon, 522 Schottky-barrier photodiode, 894
spherical-mirror resonator, 451, 453 SiC Schottky diode, 809
spot size, 84, 109 silicon photonics, 780, 808
standing wave, 471 transition-metal dichalcogenides, 745
through arbitrary system, 97 Guided-wave optics, 353-390
through components, 91-99 Gyration vector, 241
through free space, 98
through graded-index slab, 109 Harmonic oscillator, 170, 323, 1072, 1298
through thin lens, 91-93 analogy with optical mode, 543
through transparent plate, 99 energy, 542
vector, 179 quantum theory, 542, 543, 573
waist radius, 84 Heaviside, Oliver, 164
wavefronts, 86 Helmholtz equation, 46, 81, 173, 192
width, 84 coupled, 954, 1049, 1060
Gaussian optics, see Paraxial optics coupled paraxial, 1050
General Electric Corporation, 787 generalized, 257, 343, 1304
Geometrical optics, see Ray optics nonlinear, 1134
Goos—Hanchen effect optical fiber, 397
shift, 253 paraxial, 51, 78, 81, 102
waveguide, 371 two-dimensional, 105
Gordon, James P., 1078 Hermite polynomials, 100, 542
Gouy effect, 86 Hermite—Gaussian beam, 99-102, 105
Graded-index axial phase, 109
GRIN material, 20, 343 complex amplitude, 101
SELFOC slab, 23 elliptic, 102
fiber, 24, 40, 396-397, 409 excess phase, 101
lens, 24 Hermite polynomials, 100
optics, 20-25, 343 Hermite—Gaussian functions, 101
ray equation, 20-21 intensity, 102
ray equation, paraxial, 21 power confinement, 109
slab, 22 superposition, 103, 109
Graphene photonics, 719, 744 Hermite—Gaussian functions, 542
Grating Hermitian operator, 1302
coupler, 377 Hero’s principle, 6
diffraction, 59, 78 Hertz, Heinrich, 871
Grazing incidence, 223, 311, 434, 698 Heterodyne
Group optical, 74, 545, 967, 1153, 1267
delay, 200 Heterostructures
index, 201 organic semiconductors, 810
velocity, 200, 352 photoconductor, 886
velocity dispersion, 201, 207, 370, photodiode, 891
425, 550, 1104 SOAs, 825

1344 INDEX
High-harmonic generation, 1141-1145 functional, 610
in Ar, 1144 hyperbolic medium, 318-319
optical frequency comb, 723 image intensifier, 875
recollisional model, 1141, 1145 incoherent light, 499-502
Hilbert transform, 625, 1298 incoherent vs. coherent, 500—502
Hole burning multiphoton microscopy, 611
spatial, 673 near-field, 146, 334
spectral, 651, 674 negative-index slab, 315—317
Hologram, 148 optical correlation, 159
computer-generated, 155 paraxial system, 31
grating vector, 153 perfect, 315, 318
holographic optical element, 155 phase object, 158
interconnection, 1222 point-spread function, 499
interconnection capacity, 1170 scanning near-field microscopy, 147
Laguerre—Gaussian beam, 104, 155 single-lens, 58, 137, 141, 500
metasurface, 342 single-lens impulse response func-
oblique plane wave, 149, 159 tion, 141, 500
point source, 149, 155, 159 single-lens transfer function, 144
rainbow, 154 single-photon, 522
volume, 153 spatial filtering, 141, 159
Holography, 147-155 spherical mirror, 11
ambiguity term, 150 structural, 610
apparatus, 152 subwavelength, 146, 315, 334
computer-generated, 155, 1171 thick lens, 32
dynamic, 1009 thin lens, 31
Fourier-transform, 150 three-photon microscopy, 61 1
hologram, 148 two-photon, 549, 550
holographic code, 148 two-photon microscopy, 610
object wave, 148 two-point resolution, 159
off-axis, 150 X-ray, 705
optical correlation, 159 Impedance, 176
real-time, 1045 complex, 183
reconstructed wave, 149 imaginary, 308, 310
reference wave, 148 Impermeability, electric
spatial filters, 151 effect of electric field, 990
surface-relief, 1172 in magneto-optic material, 243
volume, 153 tensor, 230, 989
Huygens, Christiaan, 41 Impulse response function, 1296, 1299
Huygens—Fresnel principle, 123, 193 4-f imaging, 141
Hyperbolic free space, 122
media: Type-I & Туре-П, 352 incoherent light, 499
medium, 317-320 single-lens imaging, 137, 141, 500
metamaterial, 339—340, 352 Ince—Gaussian beam, 105
Incoherent light, see Coherence
IBM Corporation, 787 Index ellipsoid, 230, 232—233, 989
Imaging, 137-147, 499 acoust-optic modification, 968-970
2-f, 127, 549 electro-optic modification, 989-990
4-f, 139 Index of refraction, see Refractive index
4-f impulse response function, 141 — Infrared
4-f system transfer function, 139 frequencies, 42, 853
diffraction limit, 146 LWIR band, 42, 853
equation, 11, 17, 32, 58, 138, 315 molecular-fingerprint region, 853
equation, incoherent light, 499 MWIR band, 42, 853
focal-plane array (FPA), 907 optical fiber, 429

INDEX 1345
sensor card, 612 light from extended source, 495
wavelengths, 42, 853 multiple waves, 65—71, 75
Injection lasers, see Laser diodes oblique-plane-wave, 64
Instantaneous frequency, 1081 OCT, 492
Insulators partially coherent light, 489-496
band structure, 577 plane-wave and spherical-wave, 64
Integrated QOCT, 550
optics, 354, 375, 808 single-photon, 525, 555
photonics, 354, 375, 808 spherical-wave, 65, 493
Intensity two-photon, 550
autocorrelation function, 1150 two-wave, 61, 74, 489
average, 475 visibility, 78, 490
Bessel beam, 106 Interferometer, 62—71
Bessel-like beam, 107 double-slit, 65, 493, 495, 505, 512,
electromagnetic, 165, 172, 176 525
elliptic Gaussian beam, 102 Fabry—Perot, 69, 70
Gaussian beam, 82, 106 Fabry-Perot, nonlinear, 1217
Hermite—Gaussian beam, 102 finesse, 69, 266, 441
instantaneous, 476 gravitational-wave, 70—71, 545
irradiance, 44, 812 gyroscope, 63
Laguerre—Gaussian beam, 103 Hong—Ou—Mandel, 550
measurement for pulse, 1146 interferogram, 491
optical, 44, 46 LIGO, 70, 545
partially coherent light, 475 Mach-Zehnder, 62, 1181
polychromatic light, 72 Michelson, 62, 70, 75, 78, 491
random, 476 Michelson stellar, 505
scattered, 193, 194 multipath, 66, 1183
spectral density, 480 MZI, NL, 1185, 1216, 1218, 1223
Interconnect, optical, 1166-1178 nonlinear, 1154, 1156, 1162
circulator, 1168, 1173 role of spatial coherence, 493
computer-com, 1174—1177 role of temporal coherence, 490
diffractive, 1168 Sagnac, 62
free-space, 1168—1172 Sagnac, nonlinear, 1185, 1201
guided-wave, 1172 self-referenced spectral, 1154
holographic, 1177 single-photon, 526
inter-board, 1174 spectral, 1153
inter-chip, 1174 stellar, 505
interconnection matrix, 1166 temporal, 74, 1153
intrachip, 1176 Invisibility cloak, 347—348
introduction to, 1164—1165 metamaterials, 348
isolator, 1167 Ionization
nonreciprocal, 1167, 1173 coefficients, 895
nonreciprocal, multiport, 1167 coefficients, history-dependent, 903
optochip, 1174 coefficients, position-dependent, 903
rationale, 1177 energy of a donor electron, 742
refractive, 1168 energy of an atom, 568
Interference, 61-71, 489-496 energy of Ar, 1144
Bragg reflection, 67 energy of H, 564, 568, 742
double-slit experiment, 65, 493, 525 ratio, 896
equation, 61, 489 Ions
finite number of waves, 66, 1183 actinide metals, 572
Fourier-transform spectroscopy, 491 electron configuration, 569
Fresnel zone plate, 67 lanthanide metals, 568, 571, 572
infinite number of waves, 68 noble-gas lasers, 568

1346 = INDEX
term symbol, 569 cascaded Raman fiber, 692
transition metals, 569 cascaded silicon Raman, 692
Irradiance, 44, 812 cavity dumping, 708, 730
Isolator, optical, 250, 967, 1167 ceramic hosts, 681
chemical, 696
John, Sajeev, 255 CO, 854
Jones matrix, 217-221 СО5, 645, 706, 720, 854
cascaded devices, 219, 253 coherent-state generation, 544
coordinate transformation, 219 cooling, 599
diagonal, 222 Cr2+:ZnS, 645, 686, 706, 854
field version, 509 Cr2+:ZnSe, 686, 854
half-wave retarder, 219, 220 Cr3+ :colquiriite, 682
linear polarizers, cascaded, 254 Cr?+ :crysoberyl, 570, 645, 706
normal modes, 220 Cr+ :sapphire, 570, 645, 657, 664,
polarization rotator, 219, 549 681, 706, 716, 730
polarizer, 217, 253 Cr** -forsterite, 645, 686, 706, 720
quarter-wave retarder, 218 crystalline hosts, 681
wave retarder, 218, 253 Cu Ka, 645, 701
wave-retarder cascade, 219, 253 dopant ions, 681
Jones vector, 215—221 DPSS, 682, 690, 789
coordinate transformation, 219 dye, 696, 697
field version, 507 efficiency, 669
normal modes, 220 Er°* :silica fiber, 645, 689, 706, 720
orthogonal expansion, 215, 216 excimer, 695
two-photon, 547, 548 exciplex, 695
extreme-ultraviolet, 697—702
Kaminow, Ivan Paul, 1224 Fe?+ :ZnS, 686
Kao, Sir Charles Kuen, 1224 Ее?+:Улбе, 686
Keck, Donald B., 391 fiber, 687—691
Kerr four-level pumping, 630, 633
coefficient, 978, 1037, 1077 free-electron, 702—705
effect, 978, 994, 1037 frequency pulling, 664
lens, 1039 gain clamping, 666
medium, 1036, 1129, 1149 gain switching, 707, 711, 730
medium characteristic length, 1130 gas, 695-696
switch, 1148 glass hosts, 681
Kerr, John, 975 НО, 706
Kramers—Kronig relations, 186, 1298 HAPLS, 640, 849, 1095
HCN, 706
Laguerre He-Ne, 645, 706, 720
-Gaussian beam, 102—105, 155 in-band pumping, 634, 686, 689, 697
generalized polynomial, 103 incoherent-feedback, 693
polynomial, 103. InGaAsP, 645
Laguerre, Edmond Nicolas, 79 inner-shell photopumped, 700
Laser, 657—730 intracavity tilted etalon, 679
(Q-switched, 708, 712, 716, 730 ion, 695
Ag'?*, 700, 706 ionized-atom plasma, 699
alexandrite, 570, 645, 706 Krt-ion, 568, 706
Ar*-ion, 568, 645, 678, 706, 720 KrF exciplex, 706
ATF exciplex, 645, 706 lasing without inversion, 663
Brillouin fiber, 692 linewidth, 680
broadening, homogeneous, 672 loss coefficient, 661
broadening, inhomogeneous, 673 metal-nanocavity, 863
СЗ+, 645, 699, 706 methanol, 706

INDEX 1347
microcavity, 854—862 ribbon fiber, 688
microdisk, 859 ruby, 570, 645, 657, 664, 681, 706,
microring, 859 716, 730
microring, coupled, 1219 SASE, 703
mode locking, active, 719 Schawlow—Townes linewidth, 680
mode locking, passive, 719 Зе24+, 699
mode-locked, 685, 709, 716-723 seed, 688, 700, 701
molecular, 695 SGDEFB, 853
MOPA, 688 silicon Raman, 692, 809
multiple-mirror resonator, 679 slab-waveguide fiber, 688
multiquantum-dot, 850 solid-state, 68 1-686
multiquantum-well, 845 spatial distribution, 675
multiquantum-wire, 849 spectral distribution, 671
nanocavity, 862—864 spontaneous lifetime, 644
nanoring, 863 strained-layer QW, 846
nanosphere, 864 theory of oscillation, 659-665
Nd?+:CaFo, 572 thin-disk, 683, 684, 706
Nd?+ :glass, 571, 595, 645, 706, 720 three-level pumping, 632, 633
Nd?+:YAG, 571, 645, 683, 706, 720 threshold, 662, 663, 698
Nd?+:YVOuq, 645, 682, 706 thresholdless, 861
Ne Ka, 645, 701, 706 ТЗ :sapphire, 645, 685, 706, 720
non-plasmonic nanocavity, 863 Tm** :silica-fiber, 690, 706
number of modes, 672 transient effects, 709-721
optical vortex, 860 transition parameters, 644
oscillation conditions, 662 trapping, 600
oscillation frequencies, 664, 665 two-level pumping, 655
output characteristics, 666—680 U?+ :CaFo, 572
overall efficiency, 706 unipolar, 851
petawatt, 640, 849, 1095 unstable-resonator, 677
phase noise, 680 vibronic, 570, 685, 686
phonon-terminated, 686 Ww*46+ 699
photon lifetime, 662 wall-plug efficiency, 706
photonic-bandgap fiber, 688 wavelengths, 644, 706
photonic-crystal, 860 X-ray, 697—702
photonic-crystal array, 861 X-ray free-electron, 704—706
plaser, 693 Yb** :silica fiber, 639, 688, 706, 720
plasmonic nanocavity, 863 Yb?+:YAG, 645, 729
polarization, 677, 678 Yb°+:YAG thin-disk, 684, 706
powder, 693 ZnO, 693, 694
power-conversion efficiency, 706 Laser amplifier, 619-656, 659
pulsed, 707—721 ASE, 651-653, 699, 821, 830
pumping, 629, 635 bandwidth, 624
quantum cascade, 851-854 broadband, 655
quantum-confined, 844—854 coherent, 620
quantum-dot, 850 Doppler-broadened medium, 650
quantum-well, 845 Er** :silica fiber, 641-642
quantum-wire, 849 four-level pumping, 630, 633, 729
quasi-three-level pumping, 633 gain, 623
quasi-two-level pumping, 634 gain coefficient, 622, 660
radar, 75 gain coefficient, saturated, 646, 649
Raman fiber, 691-692 gain, saturated, 647, 649
random, 693—695 homogeneously broadened, 645—649
rate equations, 709 in-band pumping, 634, 640, 642
rhodamine-6G dye, 645, 706, 720 in-line, 636

1348 = INDEX
incoherent optical, 620 II—antimonide, 854
inhomogeneously broadened, 649 Ш-У quantum-dot-on-Si, 859
line, 636 in-band pumping, 817
МОРА, 636 index-guided, 834
MOPA, 636, 688 interband, 851
National Ignition Facility, 639, 688 interband cascade, 854
Nd?*:glass, 638—640, 1095 IV-VI, 854
noise, 651-653 lead-salt, 854
nonlinearity, 645—651 light—current curve, 837, 839
optical fiber, 640-642 linewidth, 843
phase-shift coefficient, 625 linewidth-enhancement factor, 843
photon statistics, 653, 656 mode-locked, 844
population inversion, 582, 622—629 multimode MQW, 848
postamplifier, 636 PbSnSe, 854
power amplifier, 636 PbSnTe, 854
preamplifier, 636 phase noise, 843
pumping, 626-635 power output, 836
quasi-three-level pumping, 633 power-conversion efficiency, 838
quasi-two-level pumping, 634 ridge-waveguide, 847
rare-earth-doped fiber, 640 Schawlow—Townes linewidth, 843
rate equations, 626-629 single-mode, 842
rates and decay times, 626 single-mode MQW, 847
ruby, 636-637 slope efficiency, 837
saturation, 645—651 spatial characteristics, 841
saturation time constant, 629 spectral characteristics, 839
spontaneous lifetime, 644 threshold, 834
steady-state, 626 VCSEL, 856-858
theory, 622—625 VECSEL, 721, 859
three-level pumping, 632, 633 wall-plug efficiency, 838
transition characteristics, 644 wavelength-tunable, 843
two-level pumping, 655 Layered media, 258—276
wavelengths, 644 off-axis wave, 264

Laser diodes (LDs), 831-844 Lens, 16-18
bipolar, 851 aspheric, 17
broad-area, 834, 848, 849 biconcave, 17
buried-heterostructure, 848 biconvex, 17
communications component, 1232 collimating, 95
compare with LEDs, 839, 841 compound, 17
compare with SLEDs, 839, 841 converging, 17
confinement factor, 833 cylindrical, 17, 24, 40, 117, 118
differential responsivity, 837 diverging, 17
distributed Bragg reflector, 842 dome, 799, 814, 815
distributed-feedback, 842, 848 double-convex, 58
double-heterostructure, 825, 845 electro-optic, 976
efficiency, 836 expanding, 95
external differential efficiency, 836 focal length, 16
external-cavity, 843 focal point, 33
extraction efficiency, 838 focusing, 58, 93, 109
far-field radiation pattern, 842 Fourier transform, 126, 128, 158,
gain condition, 834 513, 549
gain-guided, 834 Fresnel, 18
Ge, 772 Fresnel zone plate, 67, 118
GeSn-on-Si, 860 graded-index, 24, 60
group-IV, 859 hyperlens, 319

INDEX 1349
imaging, 58, 137, 139, 141, 158, 500 lighting, 811-817
Kerr, 719, 1039 materials, 803—817
LED, 799 optics for, 15, 799
meniscus, 17 organic, 810, 816
perfect, 315-317 output photon flux, 799
plano-concave, 17 overall efficiency, 800
plano-convex, 17, 58 phosphor-conversion, 814
principal point, 33 photonic-crystal, 798
relaying, 94 plasmonic, 796
sequence, 36, 37 power-conversion efficiency, 800
shaping, 93 quantum-dot, 807, 814
spherical, 16 resonant-cavity, 800
superlens, 316 response time, 802
thick, 33 responsivity, 801
thin, 57, 91 retrofit lamps, 816
time, 1113, 1162 roughened-surface, 798
vertex point, 33 solid-state lighting, 811-817
Lidar, 789 spatial pattern, 799
coherent, 75 spectral distribution, 802, 868
PIC, 1238 surface-emitting, 804
Light surface-mounted device, 814
classical, 4, 539 trapping of light, 19, 39
guide, 18 ultraviolet applications, 808
interaction with atoms, 583—602 visible applications, 807
interaction with semiconductors, 766 wall-plug efficiency, 800
line, 285 white, 813—815
nonclassical, 4, 539, 544, 546 WOLED, 810
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs), 789-817 Line broadening, 593-597
additive color mixing, 814—815 collision, 595
AMOLED, 1004 Doppler, 597
arrays, 815 homogeneous, 572, 595
bioinspired, 798 inhomogeneous, 572, 595
Ce?+: YAG phosphor, 814 lifetime, 593
characteristics, 794—803 Linear system
chip-on-board (COB), 815 causal, 1298
color rendering index (CRI), 812 Hilbert transform, 1298
communications component, 1233 impulse response function, 1299
compare with incandescent, 812, 816 isoplanatic, 1299
compare with LDs, 839, 841 Kramers—Kronig relations, 1298
compare with SLEDs, 839, 841 modes, 1301-1305
complementary colors, 813 one-dimensional, 1296-1299
correlated color temperature, 812 point-spread function, 1299
device structures, 803-817 shift-invariant, 1296, 1299
die geometries, 798 supermodes, 383
discrete, 813 time-invariant, 1296
edge-emitting, 804 transfer function, 1297, 1300
electronic circuitry, 803, 816 two-dimensional, 1299-1300
external efficiency, 800 Lineshape function, 586
extraction efficiency, 796, 869 Linewidth
illumination applications, 788, 811 -enhancement factor, 843
indication applications, 788 laser, 680
infrared applications, 806 laser diode, 843
internal efficiency, 795, 800 Schawlow—Townes, 680, 843
light—current curve, 801, 839 transition, 586, 644

1350 INDEX
Liquid crystal dipole moment, 178
cholesteric, 244 field, 162
electro-optics of, 996-1005 flux density, 163
ferroelectric, 1001 Magnetization density, 164
modulator, 997-1001 Magneto-optics, 242—243
nematic, 244, 996 Faraday effect, 242, 1013
optics of, 244—246 magnetogyration coefficient, 243
parameters, 999 switch, photonic, 1195
smectic, 244, 1001 Verdet constant, 243
switch, photonic, 1194 Magnification
twisted nematic, 244—246, 999 Gaussian beam, 92
wave retarder, 997-1001 shift-variant, 144
Liquid-crystal display (LCD), 1002 spherical boundary, 15
active matrix, 1003 spherical lens, 17
passive-matrix, 1002 spherical mirror, 11
segmented, 1002 time lens, 1162
Lithography Maiman, Theodore H., 657
electron-beam, 348, 468, 696 Manley—Rowe relations, 1029, 1051, 1063
EUV, 696, 702 Maser, 659, 680
focused ion-beam, 348, 696 astrophysical, 694
holographic, 298 Master-oscillator fiber-amplifier, 688
micro-, 298 examples, 689
multiphoton, 299, 611 Master-oscillator power-amplifier
X-ray, 696 examples, 636, 639, 688, 689
LLNL, 639, 688, 698, 699, 849, 1095 Material
Localized surface plasmon, 330-332 double-negative (DNG), 306
LED, 796 double-positive (DPS), 306
nanolaser, 862 equation, 173, 228, 241, 243
resonance, 330 hyperbolic, 317-320, 352
Logic left-handed, 306, 309
photonic logic gates, 1211 negative-index (NIM), 309, 314—317
Lorentz single-negative (SNG), 306
oscillator, 186, 1018, 1072 Matrix optics, 27—37
relativistic factor, 703 ABCD matrix, 28, 1302
Lorentzian, 189, 483, 512, 593-595, 624, arbitrary paraxial system, 31
625, 647, 730, 1080, 1292 Bragg grating, 271
Luminescence, 607—612 layered media, 258—276, 1303
betaluminescence, 607 periodic media, 280-286
bioluminescence, 608 periodic systems, 33—37, 447-450
cathodoluminescence, 607, 618 ray-transfer matrix, 27, 1302
chemiluminescence, 608 scattering matrix, 259—265
electroluminescence, 608 scattering vs. wave-transfer, 260
fluorescence, 609, 811 simple components, 29
multiphoton fluorescence, 610 thick lens, 32
phosphorescence, 609, 811 transmission matrix, 380, 383
photoluminescence, 609—612, 813 wave-transfer matrix, 258—265, 1303
radioluminescence, 609 Maurer, Robert D., 391
sonoluminescence, 607 Maxwell’s equations
up-conversion fluorescence, 611 boundary conditions, 164, 221
Luminous complex permeability, 309-310
efficacy, 812, 817 complex permittivity, 309-310
flux, 812, 817 dielectric constant, 167
electric field, 162
Magnetic electric flux density, 163

INDEX 1351
impermeability tensor, 230 Micro-optics, 305, 1168
in a medium, 163, 172 Microcavity, see Microresonator
in conductive medium, 320-326 Microcavity lasers, 854—862
in free space, 162 Microresonator
magnetic field, 162 microcavity, 463
magnetic flux density, 163 microdisk, 465
magnetization density, 164 micropillar, 465
permeability, 163, 167, 306, 343 microsphere, 466—468
permeability tensor, 343 microtoroid, 465
permittivity, 163, 167, 306 modal density, 465
permittivity tensor, 170, 228, 343 modal volume, 464
polarization density, 164, 1017 photonic-crystal, 468
relative permittivity, 167 quality factor, 464
speed of light, 163, 167 rectangular, 464—465
vector potential, 177 Microscopy
wave equation, 163, 167, 169, 171 multiphoton, 610, 611
Maxwell, James Clerk, 160 near-field, 147
Media, see Materials three-photon, 611
Metals two-photon, 610
band structure, 577 Mie scattering, 197
bound-electron absorption, 324 Miniband, 579, 764, 779, 852
conductive media, 320-326 QCL, 852
conductivity, 577 Mirror
Drude model, 322—326 collimator, 9
group velocity, 352 elliptical, 9
loss, 470 paraboloidal, 8, 10
optics of, 304, 320-326 planar, 8, 53, 78
photoemission, 873 spherical, 9, 30, 78, 96
plasma frequency, 698 variable-reflectance spherical, 97
plasmonics, 320-334 MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 787
reflectance, 324 Mixing, optical, 74, 967, 1153, 1267
work function, 873 Mode locking, 76, 709, 716-723
Metamaterials applications, 721
holey metallic film, 342 examples, 685-690, 696, 720
hyperbolic, 339-340, 352 external-cavity LDs, 844
invisibility cloak, 348 fiber lasers, 844
metasurfaces, 340—343 harmonic, 721
negative-index, 338—339 Kerr-lens, 719, 1039
negative-permeability, 337—338 methods, 719
negative-permittivity, 336-337 optical frequency comb, 721
optical fiber, 428 parameters, 718
optics of, 304, 334—343 properties, 716, 718, 730
photonic-crystal, 256, 334, 428 QCLs, 721, 854
point-dipole approximation, 335 QD lasers, 851
Metameric white light, 813 saturable absorber, 719
Metasurfaces, 340-343 SESAM, 719
complementary, 340 VECSELs, 721, 859
holey metallic film, 342 Modes
hologram, 342 discrete linear system, 1302
phase modulator, 341 eigenfunction, 1301
reflection, 342 eigenvalue, 1301
refraction, 342 eigenvector, 1301
Snell’s law, modified, 342 homogeneous medium, 1305
Michelson stellar interferometer, 505 integral operator, 1303

1352 INDEX
linear system, 1301-1305 vibrating triatomic, 574
normal, 1304 Momentum
ordinary differential equation, 1304 electromagnetic, 165
partial differential equation, 1304 localized photon, 523
periodic medium, 1305 localized wave, 523
resonator, 1304 photon, 523-524, 554, 555
supermodes, 383 radiation pressure, 524, 555
zero-point energy, 518, 573, 586 Momentum, angular
Modulation photon orbital, 524
amplitude shift keying, 1259 photon spin, 524
binary phase shift keying, 1259, 1273 Mourou, Gérard, 1078
constellation, 1259 Multiphoton
differential phase shift keying, 1259 absorption, 1017
digital, 1258 detection, 939, 1156, 1162
field, 1257, 1266 fluorescence, 610
frequency shift keying, 1259 lithography, 298, 299, 611
intensity, 1258 microscopy, 610, 611
multilevel coding, 1259 photoluminescence, 610
on-off keying, 931, 1259, 1272 Multiple access
phase shift keying, 1259 code-division, 1276
pulse code, 1258 frequency-division, 1276
quadrature amplitude, 1259 time-division, 1276
quaternary phase shift keying, 1259 Multiplexing
spectral efficiency, 1259 code-division, 1261
Modulator CWDM, 1263
acousto-optic, 959 DWDM, 1263
electroabsorption, 1010, 1011 electronic, 1261
intensity, 998 frequency-division, 1260
intensity, acousto-optic, 973 optical, 1261
intensity, electro-optic, 981-983, 995 space-division, 1263—1266
intensity, magneto-optic, 1013 time-division, 1208, 1260
intensity, push—pull, 1014 wavelength-division, 1179, 1262
interferometric, 981 Multiquantum
liquid-crystal, 997-1001 -dot lasers, 850
Mach-Zehnder, 981, 1014 -well lasers, 845
multiquantum-well, 1010 -wire lasers, 849
optically addressed SLM, 1004 well, 764, 1010
parallel-aligned SLM, 1005
phase, 998 Nano-optics, see Nanophotonics
phase, acousto-optic, 973 Nanocavity lasers, 862-864
phase, cascaded, 1014 Nanophotonics, 193-199, 305, 326-343,
phase, electro-optic, 973, 979, 995 386—388, 428, 469-470
phase, opto-optic, 1076 nanolasers, 862
quadratic phase, 1100 subwavelength imaging, 147, 315
spatial light, 987-989 Nanoresonator, 469—470
spatial light, acousto-optic, 965 metallic nanodisk, 469
spatial light, liquid-crystal, 1002 metallic nanosphere, 470
Molecules, 572—575 Nanosphere
covalent bonding, 572 dielectric, 196-197
dye, 575 metallic, 330-332
ionic bonding, 572 scattering from, 196-197, 330-332
rotating diatomic, 573 Near-field imaging, 146, 334
van der Waals bonding, 572 Negative-index
vibrating diatomic, 573 materials, 314

INDEX 1353
metamaterials, 338—339 differential-equation description, 1071
Network, fiber-optic, 1274-1281 dispersive medium, 1069—1074
broadcast-and-select, 1277 downconversion, 1027, 1077
bus, 1275 electro-optic effect, 1024
interface, 1276 extreme, 1141
local-area (LAN), 1274 five-wave mixing, 1077
mesh, 1275 four-wave mixing, 1042, 1044, 1059,
multi-hop broadcast-and-select, 1278 1074, 1077, 1140
ring, 1275 frequency conversion, 1027, 1054
star, 1275 HHG, 723, 1141
topologies, 1275 holography, real-time, 1045
wavelength-routed, 1279 idler, 1027
WDM, 1277 integral-transform description, 1070
Newton, Sir Isaac, 3 introduction to, 1016-1017
Nobel laureates, 110, 160, 619, 657, 731, Kerr effect, optical, 1037, 1042
867, 943, 1015, 1224 Kerr medium, 1036
Nobel lectures, 157, 431, 551, 615, Manley—Rowe, 1029, 1051, 1076
616, 726, 727, 782, 783, 867, Miller’s rule, 1073
868, 938, 972, 1075 nonlinear coefficients, 1018, 1019,
Noise 1025, 1037, 1066, 1068
1/7, 923 nonparametric, 1017, 1028
ASE, 651, 830 parametric, 1017
background, 911 parametric interactions, 1026-1029
circuit, 910, 922-930 periodic poling, 1035, 1036
dark-current, 911 phase conjugation, 1044, 1063
gain, 910, 915 phase matching, 1026, 1029-1033
generation—recombination (GR), 940 phase-mismatching tolerance, 1076
laser phase, 843 photonic-crystal soliton, 1141
optical amplifier, 651 plane-wave conjugation, 1045
photoconductor, 940 polarization density, 1017—1019
photocurrent, 912 poling, 1036
photodetector, 909-923 pump, 1027
photoelectron, 539, 910, 912 quasi-phase matching, 1034, 1076
photon, 533-539, 910, 911 Raman gain, 1041
pink, 923 rectification, optical, 1023
semiconductor optical amplifier, 821 rectification, pulsed optical, 1128
shot, 518, 703, 912, 913 refraction, nonlinear, 1038
superluminescent diode, 830 scattering theory, 1020, 1076
thermal, 922 Schrodinger equation, nonlinear, 1040,
Nondiffracting beams, 105—107 1135, 1138
Nondiffracting waves, 136 second-order, 1021—1036, 1047—1059
Nonlinear optical coefficients, 1018, 1019, self-focusing, 1039
1025, 1037, 1066, 1068 SFG, 1027
Nonlinear optics, 171, 1015-1077 SFG and SHG combined, 1077
anharmonic oscillator, 1071-1073 SHG, 1021, 1027, 1049, 1051
anisotropic dispersive medium, 1073 SHG efficiency, 1022, 1052
anisotropic medium, 1066-1069, 1073 SHG phase mismatch, 1053
Born approximation, 1020, 1076 signal, 1027
chi-two medium, 1021 solitary wave, 1131
coherence length, wave-mixing, 1032 soliton self-frequency shift, 1140
coupled waves, 1047 soliton, spatial, 1039
coupled-waves, 1059, 1127 soliton, spatiotemporal, 1139
cross-phase modulation, 1041 soliton, temporal, 425, 1130-1139
DFG, 854, 1027 SPDC, 548, 1027

1354 = INDEX
spherical-wave conjugation, 1045 Numerical aperture, 19, 25, 39, 181, 366,
SPM, 425, 1038, 1129, 1130, 1140 395, 432
supercontinuum generation, 1139
THG, 1037, 1063 Ohm’s law, 320, 882
third-order, 1036-1047, 1059-1066 Optical
three-wave mixing, 545, 1025, 1026, frequency comb, 721, 1141
1043, 1050, 1061, 1066, 1073, Kerr effect, 1037, 1042
1076, 1077, 1127, 1162 lattices, 601
THz pulse generation, 1128 molasses, 599
tuning curves, 1029 OADM, 1179, 1180, 1279
two-wave mixing, 1009, 1026, 1042 pathlength, 5, 6, 53, 78
ultrafast, 1126-1145 phase conjugation, 1044, 1063
up-conversion, 1054, 1055 sectioning, 492, 550
Volterra-series expansion, 1070 tweezers, 600
walk-off effect, 1126 Optical activity, 240—242
wave equation, 1019, 1047, 1133 gyration vector, 241
wave restoration, 1046 normal modes, 241
Nonlinear-optic devices rotatory power, 242
amplifier, parametric, 1027, 1056 Optical coherence, see Coherence
amplifier, phase-sensitive, 1062 Optical coherence tomography, 492
amplifier, reflection, 1065 frequency-domain, 493
amplifier, transmission, 1065 quantum, 550
DFG, 1027 time-domain, 492
downconverter, 1027, 1077 Optical components, 8—20, 53-61
FPI, 1217, 1218 active-matrix LCD, 1003
intensity autocorrelator, 1150, 1162 active-matrix OLED, 1004
lens, optical Kerr, 1039 antireflection coatings, 264, 301
loop mirror, 1186 axicons, 14, 57, 106, 137
modulator, opto-optic phase, 1076 backlight, 1002
MZI, 1216, 1218 beam combiners, 13
oscillator, doubly resonant, 1058 beam directors, 14
oscillator, parametric, 1027, 1057 beamsplitters, 13, 63, 247, 263, 268,
oscillator, phase-conjugation, 1066 301, 522, 539, 549
oscillator, singly resonant, 1058 catadioptric, 15
router, directional-coupler, 1186 circulator, 1173
router, nonlinear MZI, 1185 collimators, 9, 15, 799
router, nonlinear Sagnac, 1185 diffraction gratings, 59, 78
router, soliton, 1187 electro-optic prism, 983
SFG, 1027 fiber couplers, 413
streak camera, 1149 fibers, 392, 422—423, 426, 429
switch, FWM, 1199 filter, acousto-optic, 966
switch, optical Kerr, 1148, 1198 frequency shifter, acousto-optic, 967
switch, photonic, 1196-1211 graded-index, 22—24, 40, 60, 396
switch, Sagnac, 1201 integrated, 354, 808
switch, SFG, 1197 isolator, 250, 967, 1167
switch, SHG, 1147 LED optics, 15, 799
switch, XPM, 1197-1199 lenses, 16—18, 57, 58, 319
up-converter, 1027 mirrors, 9, 10, 53
Nonparametric processes, 1028 modulators, acousto-optic, 959
Normal modes passive-matrix LCD, 1002
anisotropic medium, 230, 232—233 photonic lantern, 414
optically active medium, 241 plates, 39, 55
polarization system, 220, 221 polarizers, 217, 253, 520
prisms, 13, 14, 56, 57

INDEX 1355
resonators, 434, 447, 459, 463, 516 systems, 1238—1257
scanners, acousto-optic, 961 time budget, 1249
segmented LCD, 1002 Optical indicatrix, see Index ellipsoid
space switches, acousto-optic, 964 Optical materials
spatial light modulator, 965, 1002 2D, 745, 780
spectrum analyzer, AO, 963 fused silica, 19, 186, 191, 204, 205,
spiral phase plate, 104 207, 394, 416, 417, 419, 641,
superprism, 1180 961, 1110
thin films, 264, 301 GaAs, 207
waveguide couplers, 376-383 glass, BK7, 1098, 1105, 1107, 1116
waveguides, 355, 363, 372, 386 glass, phosphate, 639, 643

Optical fiber amplifier, 640-642 glass, phosphosilicate, 643, 692
communications component, 1234 host glass, 640
compare with SOA, 830 LiINbOs, 254, 375, 973, 980, 992,
Optical fiber communications, 1224—1286 995, 1006, 1036

analog, 1253 LiTaO3, 992, 995
analog coherent, 1271 periodically poled, 1035, 1036
attenuation, 1246, 1247, 1252 quartz, 240, 242, 254, 1015
attenuation compensation, 1253 soft glasses, 429
balanced homodyne receiver, 1268 ТеО5, 958
balanced mixer, 1268 TMDs, 745, 780
bit error rate, 1245 Optical receiver
coherent, 1266-1274 analog receiver sensitivity, 929-930
coherent receiver advantages, 1269 bipolar-transistor amplifier, 925
components, 1226-1238 bit error rate, 911, 932
direct vs. heterodyne, 1274 circuit-noise parameter, 923-925
direct vs. homodyne, 1274 digital receiver sensitivity, 931-934
dispersion, 1246, 1249, 1252 FET amplifier, 925
dispersion compensation, 1254, 1255 on-off keying (OOK), 931
dispersion management, 1255 resistance-limited, 924
evolution, 1240-1243 sensitivity, 911
eye diagram, 1245 signal-to-noise ratio, 925—929
fibers, 1226-1231 SNR dependence on APD gain, 928
heterodyne receiver, 1267 SNR dependence on bandwidth, 928
heterodyne vs. direct, 1274 SNR dependence on photon flux, 926
homodyne BPSK, 1273 Optical system, periodic, 33—37, 447-450
homodyne OOK, 1272 GRIN plate, 40
homodyne QPSK, 1273 harmonic trajectory, 35
homodyne vs. direct, 1274 lens sequence, 36
homodyne vs. heterodyne, 1274 lens-pair sequence, 37
introduction to, 1225-1226 periodic trajectory, 35
local oscillator, 1267 ray position, 33
modulation, 1257—1260 resonator, 37, 40
multiplexing, 1260-1263 Organic semiconductors, 742, 876
networks, 1274—1281 Oscillator
optical amplifier, 1234 harmonic, 170, 323, 542, 543, 573,
performance, 1243-1246 1072, 1298
photodetector, 1235-1237 Lorentz, 186, 1018, 1072
photonic integrated circuit, 1238 optical parametric, 1027, 1057
power budget, 1247 phase-conjugation, 1066
receiver sensitivity, 1246
soliton, 1256 Paraboloidal
SONET standard, 1239, 1276 approximation, 49
sources, 1232—1234 mirror, 8

1356 = INDEX
surface, 86 amplifier, 70
wave, 49, 51, 81 matching, 288, 1026, 1029-1145
Parametric noise, 680, 843
amplifier, 1027, 1056 spiral, 103, 155
downconverter, 1027 velocity, 48, 200, 284, 352
oscillator, 1027, 1057 Phosphorescence, 609, 811
oscillator, doubly resonant, 1058 Photoconductors, 875, 883—886
oscillator, singly resonant, 1058 detection circuit, 939
processes, 1017 doped extrinsic, 886
switches, 1197 extrinsic, 885
Paraxial gain, 884
approximation, 9, 27, 50 intrinsic, 883
Helmholtz equation, 51, 78 noise, 940
imaging system, 31 response time, 885
optics, 5, 9, 27-37 spectral response, 885
ray equation, 21, 22, 40 Photodetectors, 871-942
rays, 9 array detectors, 907, 1149
system, focal length, 31 array readout circuitry, 908
system, focal point, 31 avalanche photodiodes, 895—907
system, principal point, 31 bolometer, 872
system, vertex point, 31 CCD readout circuitry, 908
wave, 50, 1086 charge-coupled device (CCD), 908
wave equation, generalized, 1124 circuit noise, 922—930
Parseval’s theorem, 914, 1288 CMOS readout circuitry, 909
Partially coherent light, see Coherence communications component, 1235
Pauli exclusion principle, 565, 582, 734 digital photon-counting device, 906
Pendry, Sir John, 303 electron-multiplying CCD, 909
Penetration depth, 308, 312 external photoeffect, 873
Periodic media extrinsic photoconductive, 886
2D periodic structure, 292 focal-plane array (FPA), 907
3D periodic structure, 294 FROG, 1156
Fourier optics, 286-289 gain, 879
matrix optics, 280-281 gain noise, 915-921
Periodic table general properties, 876-883
elements, 566, 567 Golay cell, 872
semiconductors, 737 intensified CCD (ICCD), 909
Permeability, magnetic, 163, 167, 343 intensity, pulse, 1146-1151
complex, 306, 309-310 intensity-autocorrelation, 1150
negative, 306 internal photoeffect, 873
tensor, 343 introduction to, 872
Permittivity, electric, 163, 167, 306 microbolometer, 872, 907
complex, 183, 198, 306, 309-310 microchannel plate, 875
effect of electric field, 990 minimum-detectable signal, 911
effective, 198, 320 negative-electron-affinity, 874
frequency-dependent, 184 noise, 909—923
in magneto-optic material, 243 noise-equivalent power, 911
negative, 306 optical-pulse, 1146-1158
relative, 167 optical-pulse phase, 1152-1156
tensor, 170, 228, 343 organic, 876
Perot, Alfred, 433 performance measures, 910
Phase photoconductors, 875, 883—886
-mismatching tolerance, 1076 photodiodes, 887—894
-sensitive amplifier, 1062 photoelectric, 872
-shift coefficient, 660 photoelectric emission, 873-875

INDEX 1357

photoemission equation, 873 traveling-wave configuration, 890

photomultiplier, 874, 904 Photoelastic

photon detection efficiency, 876 effect, 968

photon-number-resolving, 904, 905 tensor, 969

phototube, 874 Photoluminescence, 608—612, 813

plasmonic, 878 applications, 610

pyroelectric, 872 multiphoton, 610

QDIP, 886 quantum dots, 580

quantum efficiency, 876 Photometry

QWIP, 886 illuminance, 812

Ramo’s theorem, 880 luminous efficacy, 812

RC time constant, 883 luminous flux, 812

reach-through APD, 899 photopic luminosity function, 812

resonant-cavity, 878 Photon, 516—529

response time, 880 antibunching, 780

responsivity, 878 at beamsplitter, 522

SACM APD, 899, 902 boson, 524, 537

SAM APD, 899, 901, 902 energy, 518

secondary emission, 874 Gaussian-wavepacket, 527

signal-to-noise ratio, 910, 913, 916 helicity, 524

silicon photomultiplier (SiPM), 905 in Fabry-Perot resonator, 555

single-photon, 904 in Gaussian beam, 522

specific detectivity, 911 in Mach—Zehnder, 526

spectral intensity, pulse, 1151—1152 in Young interferometer, 525

spectrogram, pulse, 1156-1158 interference, 525

streak camera, 1149 lifetime, 662

superconducting, 907 momentum, 523—524, 554, 555

thermal, 872 monochromatic, 527

thermocouple, 872 optics, 514—541

thermopile, 872 orbital angular momentum, 104, 524

transit-time spread, 880, 939 polarization, 519

transition-edge sensor (TES), 907 polychromatic, 527, 555

two-photon, 939, 1156, 1162 position, 521

vacuum photodiode, 874 position and time, 527
Photodiodes, 887-894 spin angular momentum, 524

p-i—n junction, 889 time, 526

p—n junction, 887 transmission through polarizer, 520

avalanche, 895—907 wavepacket, 527

comparison with APDs, 927 Photon detectors, see Photodetectors

depletion layer, 887 Photon stream, 529-541

edge-illuminated, 890, 892 number of photons, 531, 532

evanescently coupled, 890 partitioned, 539-541

group-IV, 892, 894 photon flux, 530, 532

heterostructure, 891 photon-flux density, 530, 532

metal—semiconductor, 893 photon-number statistics, 533—541

modes of operation, 888 randomness, 532

open-circuit operation, 888 spectral density, 531

photon-trapping microstructures, 891 Photon-number statistics, 533-541

photovoltaic operation, 888 Bernoulli, 539

response time, 888 Bernoulli trial, 912

reverse-biased operation, 889 binomial, 540, 541, 546, 557

Schottky-barrier, 893, 894 Bose-Einstein, 536, 537, 539, 556

short-circuit operation, 888 coherent light, 533

solar cell, multi-junction, 892 counting time, 533

1358 INDEX
doubly stochastic, 538, 556 thresholdless laser, 861
exponential density function, 539 waveguide, 385-386
geometric, 537 woodpile, 297
Mandel’s formula, 538 Yablonovite, 297
mean, 533, 535 Photorefractivity, 1005—1009
mean under absorption, 556 applications, 1009
negative-binomial, 556 real-time holography, 1009
noncentral-chi-square density, 656 simplified theory, 1006-1009
noncentral-negative-binomial, 653 Planck
partitioned distribution, 540, 912 Planck’s constant, 518
partitioned SNR, 541, 912 spectrum, 605
photon number, 533 Planck, Max, 515, 516, 529
photon-number distribution, 533 Plane wave, 47, 111, 113
Poisson, 534, 544, 555 acoustic, 946
random partitioning, 539, 556 conjugate, 1045
random selection, 539, 912 electromagnetic TEM, 175, 307
signal-to-noise ratio, 535, 911 partially coherent, 487
sub-Poisson, 546 pulsed, 1086
thermal light, 536 quasi-plane wave, 407
uniform, 557 reflection, 221
variance, 535 refraction, 221, 238
Photonic wavefronts, 48
bandgap, 282, 285, 296 wavefunction, 48
integrated circuits, 354, 809, 1176, Plasma
1238 frequency, 322
lantern, 414 wavelength, 322
Photonic crystal, 277-302 Plasmonics, 320—334, 387
2D, 292-294 LEDs, 796
3D, 294—299 nanolasers, 862
band structure, 282, 285, 296 photodetectors, 878
bandgap, 282, 285, 296 resonator, 469-470
Bloch modes, 277, 1305 switch, photonic, 1201
dispersion relation, 285 waveguide, 386—388
fabrication, 297, 299 Pockels
fibers, 426—428 coefficient, 978, 1025, 1077
group velocity, 284 effect, 978, 991-994, 1024
holes and poles, 298 readout modulator (PROM), 988
holes on diamond lattice, 297 Pockels, Friedrich, 975
inverse-opal, 297, 298 Poincaré sphere, 213, 508
laser, 860 Point-spread function, 1299
laser array, 861 Poisson, Siméon Denis, 871
lattice defects, 298 Polarization, 211-221
metal—dielectric array, 388 p, 222
metamaterial, 256, 334 8, 222
omnidirectional reflection, 290 -maintaining fiber, 406
one-dimensional, 277—291 autocorrelation, 506
optics, 255-302 circular, 213, 253, 509, 524
optics, introduction to, 256-258 coherency matrix, 507
phase velocity, 284 complex envelope, 211, 214
point defects, 298 complex polarization ratio, 213
projected dispersion diagram, 285 coordinate transformation, 219
silicon, 297 cross-correlation, 506
soliton generation, 1141 degree, 509
switch, photonic, 1200 electric-field vector, 211

INDEX 1359

ellipse, 211-212 wave optics, 43—44

Jones matrix, 217—221, 509 Power

Jones vector, 215—221, 507 electromagnetic, 165, 172

linear, 212, 508, 524 Gaussian beam, 83

matrix representation, 215—221, 1302 optical, 44

mode dispersion, 423 scattered, 194, 195

normal modes, 220, 221 spectral density, 479

optics, 209-254 Poynting

optics, introduction to, 210-211 theorem, 168

orthogonal, 222, 252 vector, 165, 173, 312

orthogonal expansion, 216 Principal

orthogonal Jones vectors, 215 axes, 229

parallel, 222 refractive indices, 229

partial, 506—510 Principal point

photon, 519 SELFOC lens, 24

Poincaré sphere, 213, 508 arbitrary paraxial system, 31

rotator, 219, 245, 249, 252, 253,549 Prism, 13, 14, 56

Stokes parameters, 213, 507 chirp filter, 1097, 1105, 1161

transverse-electric, 222, 223 coupler, 329, 352, 377

transverse-magnetic, 222, 224 dispersion compensation, 685

two-photon, 547 electro-optic, 983

unpolarized light, 508 laser-line selector, 677
Polarization devices spatial, 116

rotator, 252 superprism, 1180
Polarization density, 164, 1017 Prokhorov, Aleksandr M., 619
Polarization devices, 247—251 Propagation

anti-glare screen, 253 along principal axis, 230-231

cascade, 219, 253, 254 anisotropic medium, 232—233

circulator, 251 free space, 113—123

coordinate transformation, 219 gain of spatial coherence, 502

dichroic, 247 homogeneous medium, 6

Faraday rotator, 250, 1173 partially coherent light, 497-498

fast and slow axes, 218, 248, 253 van Cittert—Zernike theorem, 503

half-wave retarder, 219, 220, 253 Pulse, optical

intensity control, 249 attosecond, 1141

isolator, 250 characteristics, 1079—1083

linear-polarizer cascade, 254 chirp filtering of, 1088—1099

nonlinear Kerr switch, 1148, 1198 chirp parameter, 1082

nonreciprocal, 250-251 chirped, 1082

normal modes, 220 chirped-Gaussian, 1084—1085

polarizer, 217, 247—248, 253 complex envelope, 73, 1080

polarizing beamsplitter, 248 compression, 1099, 1109, 1130, 1144

quarter-wave retarder, 218 detection, 1146-1158

rotator, 219, 249, 549 dispersion length, 1106

router, 1184 down-chirped, 1082

wave retarder, 218, 248, 253 Fourier-transform-limited, 1084

wave-retarder cascade, 219, 253 frequency-to-space mapping, 1101
Polychromatic light, 71-76 FROG, 1156

intensity, 72 Gaussian, 1080, 1084—1085, 1161
Ponderomotive force, 703, 1142 Gaussian beam, 1087, 1120
Postulates Gaussian, bandwidth-limited, 1084

Born postulate, 563 in dispersive media, 199-203

Einstein postulates, 591 instantaneous frequency, 1081

ray optics, 5—8 intensity autocorrelation, 1150, 1162

1360 INDEX
intensity detection of, 1146-1151 tunable, 853
light bullet, 1139 Quantum dot
linear filtering, 1088 infrared photodetector (QDIP), 886
nonseparability, 1117, 1125 Quantum dots, 579—580, 607, 766
phase detection of, 1152-1156 applications, 580
plane wave, 73, 1086 artificial atoms, 580
propagation in fiber, 1102—1115 core-shell, 580
rectification, 1128 excitons, 580, 850
sech, 1040, 1080, 1133, 1136, 1161 fabrication, 579
shaping, 1101-1102 lasers, 850-851
slowly varying, 1086 LEDs, 807, 814
soliton, 1133 mode-locked lasers, 851
soliton self-frequency shift, 1140 photoluminescence, 580
soliton, spatiotemporal, 1139 self-assembly, 580, 807, 850
soliton, temporal, 1130-1139 silicon photonics, 780, 808
spatial characteristics, 1086-1088 single-photon emitter, 546, 780
spectral intensity, 1080 SOAs, 829
spectral intensity detection, 1151 synthesis, 579
spectral phase, 1080 Quantum number
spectral shift, 1117 azimuthal, 564
spectral width, 1080 magnetic, 564
spectrogram, 1083, 1156-1158 orbital angular momentum, 566
spherical wave, 78, 1086 overall angular momentum, 566
SPM, 1129, 1130, 1140 principal, 564
spread, 201 rotational, 573
streak-camera detection, 1149 spin, 564, 566
sub-femtosecond, 1141 vibrational, 573
supercontinuum light, 1139 Quantum state, 541-550
temporal broadening, 1116, 1117 amplitude-squeezed, 545
temporal width, 1080 binomial, 546, 557
three-wave mixing, 1127, 1162 biphoton, 548
THz pulse generation, 1128 coherent, 544
time-to-space mapping, 1102 entangled, 547
time-varying spectrum, 1083 Fock, 546
transform-limited Gaussian, 1084 intensity-squeezed, 546
up-chirped, 1082 number, 546
wavepacket, 73 phase-squeezed, 545
Pupil function, 138, 141, 500 photon-number-squeezed, 546
generalized, 143 quadrature-squeezed, 544
Purcell factor, 598, 796, 800, 855, 861 sub-Poisson, 546
thermal, 536
Quadric representation, 229, 230 twin-beam, 548
Quantum two-photon, 546
circuits, 550 Quantum well, 578, 761—764
cutting, 610 infrared photodetector (QWIP), 886
defect, 634, 690 lasers, 845
electrodynamics, 4, 515 SOAs, 826-830
entanglement, 547 Quantum wire, 579, 765
mechanics, 562 lasers, 849
optics, 4, 515, 541-550 Quantum-confined
Quantum cascade laser (QCL), 851-854 excitons, 779
heterogeneous, 852 lasers, 844—854
single-frequency, 853 structures, 760—766
strained-layer, 853 Quasi-phase matching, 1034, 1076

INDEX 1361
Radar spherical-mirror resonator, 447
Doppler, 75 thick lens, 32
laser, 789 thin lens, 29, 31
Radiometry Rayleigh
irradiance, 812 -Jeans formula, 463, 606
radiant flux, 812 inverse fourth-power law, 194, 417
Raman range, 81
-Nath scattering, 957, 973 scattering, 193-197, 416, 612
cascaded fiber laser, 692 Rayleigh, Lord (John William Strutt), 160
cascaded silicon laser, 692 Reciprocal
distributed fiber amplifier, 643 lattice, 292
fiber amplifier, 642 Rectification, optical, 1023
fiber laser, 691 pulsed, 1128
gain, 1041 Reflectance
lumped fiber amplifier, 643 at boundary, 222—225
scattering, 613 between GaAs and air, 226
silicon laser, 692, 809 between glass and air, 226, 253
stimulated scattering, 613, 642, 691, from a Bragg grating, 950
1140 from a plate, 227
Stokes shift, 643, 691 of a conductive medium, 321
Ramo’s theorem, 880, 939 power, 226
Random light, see Statistical optics quarter-wave film, 264, 301
Rate equations Reflection, 53, 221-227
amplifier radiation absent, 626 at a dielectric boundary, 7
amplifier radiation present, 627 at a DPS-SNG boundary, 310
broadband radiation, 617 at a metasurface, 342
photon-number, 709 at a mirror, 7
population-difference, 710 at an absorbing boundary, 253
thermal light, 604 Bragg grating, 273
Ray equation, 20-21 Brewster angle, 224, 225, 247
paraxial, 21 circularly polarized light, 253
Ray optics, 3-40 critical angle, 12, 223, 225, 310, 327
introduction to, 4—5 external, 223, 224
postulates, 5—8 frustrated total internal, 329, 378
relation to electromagnetic optics, 4 internal, 223, 225
relation to quantum optics, 4 omnidirectional, 290, 302
relation to wave optics, 4, 26, 42, 52 phase shift, 224
Ray-transfer matrix, 27-33 total internal, 12, 13, 15, 18, 223,
4 x 4, 40 253, 353, 392, 698
SELFOC plate, 40 transverse-electric polarization, 223
air followed by lens, 31 transverse-magnetic polarization, 224
arbitrary paraxial system, 31 Refraction, 53, 221-227
cascade of components, 30 all-angle, 320
determinant, 31 at a dielectric boundary, 7, 15
free-space, 29 at a hyperbolic medium, 319
inverse, 31 at a metasurface, 342
lens system, 40 at a spherical boundary, 14
parallel transparent plates, 30 at normal incidence, 346
planar boundary, 29 Brewster angle, 253
planar mirror, 29 conical, 254
skewed rays, 40 double, 238—239, 254
special forms, 28 external, 11
spherical boundary, 29 internal, 11
spherical mirror, 30 negative, 314—317

1362 INDEX
nonlinear, 1038 microsphere, 464
rays in anisotropic media, 239, 254 microtoroid, 464
transverse-electric polarization, 223 modal density (1D), 440
transverse-magnetic polarization, 224 modal density (2D), 460
without reflection, 345 modal density (3D), 462—463
Refractive index, 5, 168, 183 modal volume, 435
air, 208 modes, 1304
anisotropic media, 228—230 modes, standing wave, 437, 471
extraordinary, 229, 233, 236 modes, traveling wave, 438
frequency-dependent, 184 multiple microring, 1181
group, 201 nanodisk, 469
negative, 308 nanoresonator, 469—470
optical materials, 184, 191 nanosphere, 330-332, 470
ordinary, 229, 233, 236 number of modes, 472
resonant medium, 189 optics, 433-472, 661
Sellmeier equation, 191 periodic optical system, 37, 40, 448
Resolution photonic modes, 469
acousto-optic filter, 967 photonic-crystal, 464, 468
acousto-optic scanner, 961 planar-mirror, 436—446
electro-optic scanner, 983 plano-concave, 453
liquid-crystal display, 1003 plasmonic, 330-334, 469
multiphoton lithography, 61 1 quality factor, 435, 445, 708
multiphoton microscopy, 611 rectangular (2D), 459-460
optical-pulse detection, 1148 rectangular (3D), 461—465, 517, 1305
routing device, 1182 ring, 434, 439-440
wavelength demultiplexer, 1184 size vs. resonance wavelength, 435
Resonant medium, 186 spectral width, 440
anharmonic oscillator, 1071-1073 spherical-mirror, 447—458
Lorentz oscillator, 186, 1018, 1072 stability diagram, 449, 471
Resonator stable, 448
g-parameters, 448 symmetric, 449
axial modes, 456 transmittance, 729
bow-tie, 439-440 transverse modes, 456
circular (2D), 460—461, 469 traveling wave, 439
cold, 662 unstable, 448, 471
concentric, 449 whispering-gallery modes, 461
conditionally stable, 448 Resonator, spherical-mirror, 447—458
confinement condition, 448—450, 453 axial modes, 456
confocal, 449 free spectral range, 455, 456
diffraction loss, 457, 458, 1304 Gaussian modes, 451
energy per mode, 538 Hermite—Gaussian modes, 455
Fabry—Perot, 69, 265, 436, 661 modes, 450-458
fiber-ring, 434 ray-transfer matrix, 37, 447, 448
finesse, 69, 266, 441 resonance frequencies, 455, 456
finite apertures, 457, 1304 symmetric, 449, 453, 471, 472
free spectral range, 267, 438, 446 transverse modes, 456
frequencies, 437, 439, 446, 460 Responsivity
guided-wave, 434, 471 avalanche photodiode, 898
integrated-optic-ring, 434, 692 differential, 837
losses, 440 LD, 839
microdisk, 464 LED, 801, 839
micropillar, 464 photodetector, 878, 1146
microresonator, 463—468 SLED, 839
microring, 1180 Retarder, 218, 248

INDEX 1363
half-wave, 219, 220, 253 Raman—Nath, 957, 973
quarter-wave, 218, 254 Rayleigh, 193—197, 416, 432, 612
quartz, 254 small scatterers, 193
Ring stimulated Brillouin, 614, 644, 692
aperture, 67, 118, 159 stimulated Raman, 613, 642, 691,
benzene, 742 1140
network, 1275 Stokes, 613
resonator, 434, 439-440 strong, 196
Rotator volume fraction, 198
Faraday, 250, 1173 weak, 192—194
nonreciprocal polarization, 251, 1173 Scattering matrix, 259-265, 549
polarization, 245, 249, 252 beamsplitter, 263
Router, passive optical, 1178—1187 dielectric boundary, 262, 264
add-drop multiplexer, 1179, 1279 dielectric slab, 263, 265
arrayed waveguides, 1182, 1223 homogeneous medium, 260
broadcast-and-select, 1179 lossless medium, 261
demultiplexer, 1179 lossless symmetric system, 262
intensity-based, 1185 relation to wave-transfer matrix, 260
introduction to, 1164—1165 Schawlow, Arthur, 657, 1015
Mach-Zehnder interferometer, 1181 Schrodinger equation
multipath interferometer, 1183 nonlinear, 1040, 1135, 1138
multiplexer, 1179 time-dependent, 562, 1304
phase-based, 1185 time-independent, 542, 563, 1304
polarization-based, 1184 Schultz, Peter C., 391
waveguide grating, 1182 Second-harmonic generation, 730, 1021,
wavelength-based, 1179-1184 1049, 1051
wavelength-division multiplexer, 1179 efficiency, 1022, 1052
Russell, Philip St John, 1224 phase mismatch, 1053
switch, 1147
Saturable absorber, 649 Self-focusing, 1039
bistable device, 1217 Self-phase modulation, 425, 1038
Scalar wave optics, see Wave optics in supercontinuum generation, 1140
Scanner pulse, optical, 1129, 1130
acousto-optic, 961 Sellmeier equation, 191, 781
electro-optic, 983 Semiconductor optical amplifiers, 817
holographic, 117 bandwidth, 819, 869
Scattering, 612-614 compare with OFAs, 830
and absorption, 198—199 double-heterostructure, 825
and attenuation, 198, 416, 432 gain, 818
anti-Stokes, 613 gain coefficient, 820
Bragg diffraction, 953, 973 heterostructures, 825
Brillouin, 613 peak gain coefficient, 821, 869
CARS, 614 pumping, 822
coefficient, 198 quantum-dot, 829
Debye-Sears, 957, 973 quantum-well, 826-830
dielectric nanosphere, 196—197 SLEDs, 830
efficiency, 196 switch, photonic, 1193, 1196
elastic, 192—197 waveguide, 829
Huygens—Fresnel principle, 193 Semiconductors, 577—580
Maxwell-Garnett mixing rule, 199 k-selection rule, 770
metallic nanosphere, 330-332 p-i—n junction, 759, 889
Mie, 197, 613 p-n junction, 756, 887
quasi-static approximation, 196, 197 p—n junction, biased, 757
Raman, 613 absorption, 768, 777

1364 = INDEX
AlGaAs, 806 Kronig—Penney model, 733
AlGaN, 807 law of mass action, 750
AlInGaN, 808 minibands, 579, 764, 779, 852
AlInGaP, 806 mobility, 880
allotropes, 743 multiquantum-well, 764
alloy broadening, 794 nanocrystals, 579
Auger recombination, 752 nonradiative recombination, 752
bandgap energy, 576, 733, 738 occupancy probabilities, 746, 773
bandgap wavelength, 738, 768 optics, 766-786
bowing parameter, 785 organic, 742
Brillouin zone, 735 periodic table, 737
bulk, 578, 766—778 photoconductors, 875, 883-886
carrier concentrations, 748, 751 photoemission, 873
carrier generation, 752 quantum dots, 579, 766
carrier injection, 753 quantum wells, 578, 761—764
carrier recombination, 752 quantum wires, 579, 765
carriers, 734 quantum-confined, 760, 779
degenerate, 750 quasi-equilibrium, 751
density of states, 745 recombination coefficient, 752
density of states, joint, 770 recombination lifetime, 753
depletion layer, 756, 887 refractive index, 781
direct-bandgap, 737 SESAM, 719
dopants, 741 Shockley equation, 758
doped extrinsic, 886 Si photonics, 375
drift velocity, 880 SiC, 737
effective mass, 736 silicon photonics, 692, 780, 808,
electroluminescence, 789—794 1238
electron affinity, 873 superlattice, 579, 764, 779, 852
elemental, 737 transition probabilities, 774
energy bands, 577, 733, 1305 Vegard’s law, 739, 785
energy—momentum relations, 735 Semimetals
excitons, 767, 784, 810, 811, 1010 band structure, 577, 740, 741
extrinsic, 741 graphene, 744
Fermi function, 746 massless Dirac fermions, 744
Fermi inversion factor, 777 Shockley, William B., 731
fundamentals, 731-766 Shot noise, 518, 703, 912, 913
GaAs, 805 Silicon photonics, 375, 692, 808, 1176
GaAsP, 805 direct-mounting integration, 809
gain coefficient, 776 flip-chip integration, 809
GaN, 807 heteroepitaxy, 809, 859
heterojunction, 759 heterogeneous integration, 809
II-VI materials, 740 hybrid approach, 809
III—nitride materials, 738, 807—808 microring laser, 859
Ш-У materials, 738—739, 803-808 OEIC, 1238
impact ionization, 876, 895 PIC, 809, 1238
indirect-bandgap, 737 PLC, 1238
InGaAs, 805 quantum dots, 780
InGaAsP, 805 Single-mode
InGaAsSb, 806 fiber, 405
InGaN, 807 waveguide, 359, 366
interaction with light, 766-781 Skin depth, see Penetration depth
internal efficiency, 754 Slow light, 204
intrinsic, 741 Snell’s law, 54, 184, 221
IV_-VI materials, 741 at a boundary, 7

INDEX 1365
at a metamaterial boundary, 346 digital micromirror device, 1190
at a metasurface, 342 electro-optic, 987-989
modified, 238, 342 liquid-crystal, 1002—1005
negative refractive index, 307, 314 optically addressed, 987, 1004
proof, 8 parallel-aligned (PAL-SLM), 1005
Solids, 575—580 Pockels readout optical (PROM), 988
covalent, 575 Speckle, 406
doped dielectric media, 568 Spectral
ionic, 575 density, 479
metallic, 576 hole burning, 651
molecular, 576 packet, 596
van der Waals, 573, 576, 745 width, 481
Soliton Spectrogram, 1083, 1156-1158
N-soliton wave, 1136 Wigner distribution function, 1157
collision, 1199 Spectrum analyzer
condition, 1132 acoustic, 963
dark, 1138 interferometric, 1151
directional-coupler router, 1187 optical, 1151
envelope, 1133 Speed of light, 5, 42, 43, 163, 167, 184,
fundamental, 1135, 1162 200, 204, 516, 1016
generation, 1137 Spherical wave, 48, 177
higher-order, 1136 complex amplitude, 77
interaction, 1137 conjugate, 1045
laser, 1138 intensity, 77
optical fiber communications, 1256 paraboloidal approximation, 49
period, 1136 partially coherent, 488
photonic-crystal, 1141 pulsed, 1086
sech pulse, 1133, 1136 reflection, 78
self-frequency shift, 1140 wavefronts, 48
solitary wave, 1131 wavefunction, 48
spatial, 1039 Spin
spatialtemporal analogy, 1138 -allowed transitions, 609, 811
spatiotemporal, 1139 -forbidden transitions, 609, 811
switch, photonic, 1199 -orbit coupling, 565, 566, 811
temporal, 1130-1139 -spin coupling, 565
vector, 1200 angular momentum, 524
SONET, 1239, 1276 electron, 564, 746
Sonoluminescence, 607, 608 multiplicity, 566
Spatial photon, 516, 524, 746
coherence, 483 singlet state, 566, 575, 609, 811
dispersiveness, 241 triplet state, 566, 575, 609, 811
filter, 141, 151 Spontaneous emission
frequency, 111, 113 atoms, 583, 587—588
harmonic function, 113 enhanced, 464, 597, 796, 800
hole burning, 673 inhibited, 464, 617
Lambertian pattern, 799 occupancy probability, 773
laser emission pattern, 675 peak rate, 786
LD emission pattern, 841 Purcell factor, 598, 796, 855, 861
LED emission pattern, 799 semiconductors, 769
solitons, 1039 spectral intensity, 775
spectral analysis, 114 transition rate, 592, 775
Spatial light modulator Stark effect, 568, 601
acousto-optic, 965 light shift, 600
bistable, 1220 quantum-confined, 1010

1366 INDEX
Statistical optics, 473—513 electro-optic, 985
gain of spatial coherence, 502 electroabsorption, 1010
imaging with incoherent light, 499 ferroelectric liquid crystal, 1001
interference, 489 waveguide, 381
interferometry, 490, 493, 550 Switch, photonic, 1187—1211
introduction to, 474-475 acousto-optic, 964, 1194
longitudinal coherence, 487 all-optical, 1196-1211
optical intensity, 475 architectures, 1187
partial polarization, 506 Banyan switch, 1210
quantum interferometry, 550 buffer, 1209
spatial coherence, 483 characteristics, 1188, 1196
spectrum, 476 circuit switching, 1209
temporal coherence, 476 configurations, 1189
transmission of random light, 497 electro-optic, 1192
Step-index fiber, 393—396, 398—405, 408 energy required, 1202
Stimulated Brillouin scattering, 614, 644 Franz—Keldysh effect, 1193
Stimulated emission FWM, 1199
atoms, 585, 589-593 heat dissipation, 1203
occupancy probability, 773 implementations, 1188
semiconductors, 769 introduction to, 1164—1165
semiconductors, indirect-gap, 772 liquid-crystal, 1194
transition rate, 592, 775 magneto-optic, 1195
Stimulated Raman scattering, 613, 642, mechano-optic, 1190
691, 1140 MEMS, 1190
Stokes nonlinear Kerr, 1148, 1198
parameters, 214, 216, 507 nonlinear optical retardation, 1198
vector, 214 nonlinear Sagnac interferometer, 1201
Stokes, George Gabriel, 210 opto-optic, 1196-1211
Strain optoelectronic, 1188
sensor, 1013 optomechanical, 1190
tensor, 968 packet, 1209
Sum-frequency generation, 1027, 1197 parametric, 1197
Supercontinuum generation, 1139 photonic-crystal, 1200
Superlattice, 579, 764, 779, 852 plasmonic, 1201
quantum cascade laser, 852 programmable delay, 1209
Superluminescent diodes (SLEDs), 830 QCSE, 1193
compare with LDs, 839, 841 quantum limit, 1202
compare with LEDs, 839, 841 quantum-confined Stark effect, 1010
light—current curve, 839 ROADM, 1204, 1280
Surface plasmon second-harmonic generation, 1147
resonance spectroscopy, 329 semiconductor, 1193
resonance, 330 SFG, 1197
Surface plasmon polariton, 326 SOA, 1193, 1196
at DPS-SNG boundary, 311, 351 soliton, vector, 1200
at metal—dielectric boundary, 326 soliton-collision, 1199
nanolaser, 862 space, 964, 1187-1203
surface-charge wave, 311 space—wavelength, 1204
Susceptibility, electric, 166 switching time, 1190, 1201
complex, 181 thermo-optic, 1195
frequency-dependent, 184 ите-зрасе-ите, 1207
resonant medium, 188 time-division demultiplexer, 1207
tensor, 170 time-division multiplexer, 1207
Switch time-domain, 1206—1209
acousto-optic, 959 time-slot interchange, 1208, 1223

INDEX 1367
TOAD, 1201 occupied subshells, 566
wavelength converter, 1205 rare-earth elements, 569
wavelength selector, 1203 transition metals, 569
wavelength-channel interchange, 1204 Thermal light, 602—607
wavelength-selective, 1203—1206 blackbody radiation, 602
XGM, 1196 rate equation, 604
XPM, 1197-1199 Rayleigh—Jeans formula, 606
spectrum, 604
Tail Stefan—Boltzmann law, 606, 618
band, 750, 821, 870, 1010 thermography, 606
Fermi, 748 Wien’s law, 617
Urbach, 778, 1010 Thermo-optic effect, 1195, 1198
Talbot effect, 135 Third-harmonic generation, 1037, 1063
TEM wave, 175, 307, 355, 506 Three-wave mixing, 545, 1025, 1043,
Temperature 1050, 1061, 1066, 1073, 1076
BEC formation, 602 pulsed, 1127, 1162
blackbody spectrum, 605 Time
correlated color, 812, 816 -varying spectrum, 1083
Doppler cooling limit, 600 lens, 1113, 1162
earth, 606 Townes, Charles H., 619
single-photon recoil limit, 600 Transfer function, 1297, 1300
sub-recoil cooling, 600 4-f imaging system, 139
sun, 606 free space, 119-122, 316
thermographic images, 606 single-lens imaging, 144—145
Tensor Transformation optics, 343—348
conductivity, 882 cylindrical focusing, 346
constraints, 969, 1066, 1074 refraction at normal incidence, 346
elasto-optic, 969 refraction without reflection, 345
electric permittivity, 170, 228, 343 transformation principle, 344—347
electric susceptibility, 170 Transition
first-rank, 228 absorption, 584, 589
fourth-rank, 969, 990, 1066 excitonic, 767, 779
geometrical representation, 228 free-carrier, 767
impermeability, 230, 989 impurity-to-band, 767
index ellipsoid, 230 interband, 766, 779
linear electro-optic, 990 intersubband, 779
magnetic permeability, 343 intraband, 767
photoelasticity, 969 miniband, 779
quadratic electro-optic, 990 phonon, 767
quadric representation, 229, 230 spontaneous, 583, 587
second-order nonlinearity, 1066 stimulated, 585, 589
second-rank, 170, 228—230, 343, 882 Transmittance
strain, 968 biprism, 57
strain-optic, 969 complex-amplitude, 54, 222—225
third-order nonlinearity, 1066 diffraction grating, 59
third-rank, 990, 1066 Fabry-Perot, 266-268
zeroth-rank, 228 Fresnel biprism, 57
Terahertz graded-index plate, 60
frequencies, 42, 853, 854, 1128 optical components, 54, 497
Term symbol plate of varying thickness, 55
actinide metals, 569 power, 226
atoms, 566 prism, 56
He, 566 thin lens, 57
lanthanide metals, 569 transparent plate, 55

1368 INDEX
Tyndall, John, 353 Vortex, optical, 104
laser, 860
Ultrafast optics, 1078—1162 phase singularity, 104
introduction to, 1079 topological charge, 104, 155
linear, 1115—1125
nonlinear, 1126-1145 Wave
pulse characteristics, 1079-1088 -particle duality, 521
pulse compression, 1088—1102 acoustic plane, 946
pulse detection, 1146-1158 beating, 74, 967, 1153, 1267
pulse propagation in fibers, 1102 complex amplitude, 46
pulse shaping, 1088—1102 complex analytic signal, 71
Ultraviolet complex envelope, 47, 80, 175
EUV band, 697 complex representation, 45
frequencies, 42 complex wavefunction, 45, 72
UVA band, 42, 808 conjugate, 78, 1045
UVB band, 42 cylindrical, 78
UVC band, 42, 808 evanescent, 120, 146, 224, 316, 368
VUV band, 42 in a GRIN slab, 78
wavelengths, 42 localized, 523
Uncertainty relation monochromatic, 44—52
duration—bandwidth, 1290 nondiffracting, 136
field quadratures, 543 paraboloidal, 49, 51, 81
Heisenberg, 528, 543, 1291 paraxial, 50, 1086
position—momentum, 543 partially coherent, 487, 488
time-—energy, 527, 555 plane, 47, 111, 113
Undulator, 702 polychromatic, 71-76
Uniaxial crystal, 229, 233, 236, 317-320 pulsed, 73, 78, 1086
Units, radiometric and photometric, 812 quasi-monochromatic, 72
illuminance, 812 quasi-plane, 407
irradiance, 812 restoration, 1046
luminous efficacy, 812 retarder, 218, 248
luminous flux, 812 retarder, dynamic, 980
radiant flux, 812 retarder, liquid-crystal, 997-1001
Up-conversion, 1027, 1054, 1055 retarder, voltage-controlled, 998
fluorescence, 611 spherical, 48, 77, 78
standing, 78
Vacuum state, 518, 544 stationary, 136
van Cittert—Zernike theorem, 503—505 wavefronts, 47
VCSELs, 856-858 wavefunction, 43, 45, 71
VECSELs, 721, 859 wavelength, 47
Vector Wave equation, 43, 45, 72
beam, 179, 180 diffusion equation, 1111
potential, 177 generalized paraxial, 1124
Velocity in free space, 163
group, 200, 204, 284, 352, 360, 370, in homogeneous medium, 171
404, 412 in inhomogeneous medium, 169, 953
information, 204 in medium, 167
phase, 48, 200, 204, 284, 352 in nonlinear dispersive medium, 1133
Verdet constant, 243 in nonlinear medium, 1019, 1047
Veselago, Victor Georgievich, 303 SVE, 1111
Visibility, 78, 490 SVE, nonlinear, 1133
Visible Wave optics, 41-78
frequencies, 42 introduction to, 42—43
wavelengths, 42 postulates, 43-44

INDEX 1369
vs. electromagnetic optics, 180 metal—insulator—metal, 387
vs. ray optics, 52 metal-slab, 388, 390
Wave-transfer matrix, 258—265, 1303 modes, 355—357, 363-366
antireflection film, 264 multimode fields, 362
beamsplitter, 263 number of modes, 359, 366, 367, 390
cascade of elements, 259 numerical aperture, 366
dielectric boundary, 262, 264 optical-power flow, 359, 363
dielectric slab, 263, 265 periodic, 384
homogeneous medium, 260 photonic-crystal, 385-386
lossless medium, 261 planar dielectric, 363-372, 389, 390
lossless system, 262 planar-mirror, 355—363, 1305
relation to scattering matrix, 260 plasmonic, 386-388
Wavefronts power-transfer ratio, 381
anisotropic medium, 234—237 propagation constants, 357, 365
helical, 103, 155, 524 rectangular dielectric, 373, 390
plane-wave, 48 rectangular mirror, 372
spherical-wave, 48 side coupling, 377
Wavefunction silica-on-silicon, 375
complex, 45, 716, 1080, 1158 silicon-on-insulator, 375
electron, 562, 582, 734, 1291, 1304 single-mode, 359, 366, 390
entangled-photon, 547 switch, 381
harmonic-oscillator, 542 transfer distance, 378, 381, 985
plane-wave, 48 two-dimensional, 372—375
quantum mode, 543 Wavelength, 47
single-photon, 521 y-ray, 697
spherical-wave, 48 -division multiplexer, 1179
two-photon, 546 activation, 885
Waveguide, optical, 354 bandgap, 738, 768
arrays, 383 converter, 1205
asymmetric planar, 372 de Broglie, 601, 761
bounce angles, 357, 365, 390 infrared, 42, 853
Bragg-grating, 385 laser, 644, 706
channel, 374 laser amplifier, 644
cladding, 363 plasmon, 312
confinement factor, 369, 390 ultraviolet, 42, 697
core, 363 visible, 42
coupled-mode theory, 378-384 X-ray, 697
couplers, 378—383 zero-dispersion, 1140
coupling, 376-384, 390, 985 Wavenumber, 48, 173
cutoff, 359, 366, 390 complex, 182
cylindrical, 392 Wavepacket, 73
dispersion relation, 359, 370 mode, 527
evanescent wave, 368 random sequence, 482
extinction coefficient, 368 single-photon, 527, 594
fiber, 392 velocity, 360
field distributions, 358, 367, 389, 390 Wavevector, 47
GaAs/AlGaAs, 375 Width of a function
glass, 375 1/е-, 1292
Goos—Hanchen effect, 371 3-dB, 1292
group velocity, 360, 370 FWHM, 1292
InGaAsP, 375 Gaussian, 1290-1292
input coupling, 376 measures of, 1290-1293
LiNbOs, 375 power-equivalent, 1291
materials, 375 power-RMS, 1290

1370 = INDEX
root-mean-square (RMS), 1290
Wiener—Khinchin theorem, 480, 512
Wigner distribution function, 1157
WOLED, 810, 816, 1002
Wolf, Emil, 473
X-ray
energies, 697
hard-X-ray (HXR) band, 697
imaging, 705
optical components, 698
soft-X-ray (SXR) band, 697
wavelengths, 697
Yablonovitch, Eli, 255
Yablonovite, 297
Young, Thomas, 41
Zeeman effect, 568, 599, 601
Zero-point energy, 518, 536, 573, 586
Zone plate, Fresnel, 67, 118

USEFUL CONSTANTS
Speed of light in free space с, 2.9979x 108 m/s Planck’s constant h 6.6261 x 10-34 J -s
Permittivity of free space ©, 8.8542 x 10-12 F/m Electron charge е 1.6022 x 10-9 С
Permeability of free space и, 1.2566 x 10-6 H/m Electron mass то 9.1094 x 10-31 kg
Impedance of free space No 376.73 fe) Boltzmann’s constant k 1.3807х 10-23 J/°K
PREFIXES FOR UNITS
104 07! ЮВ oo !? 0? 0° to 0 0 0 1 to! 05 08 0 1074
уосю zepto atto femto pico nano micro milli kilo mega giga tera peta  exa zetta yotta
(у) (2) (а) (В (р) (п) (м (m) ю м G ТН ФФ в @% ©@®
ТНЕ РНОТОМ
| хкуотоо М отозагноточз MME ELECTRONICS
Wavelength
“ne 00pm nm 10mm 100 ИИ 10um__100um st mm Lom 10 cm
— oO
Frequency
= a dd
1 EHz 100 PHz 10 PHz 1 PHz 100 THz 10 THz 1 THz 100 GHz 10 GHz 1 GHz
Period
Г ПО ОР ПОРА ПОР РАНА ПОРА ООО ОА ООО ООО ООО aT В
las 10 as 100 as 1 fs 10 fs 100 fs lps 10 ps 100 ps Ins
eV
Energy 10 keV I keV 100 eV 10 eV leV 100 meV 10 meV 1 meV 100 peV 10 peV
E=hv
—— J
1fJ 100 aJ 10 aJ laJ 100 zJ 10 zJ 177 100 yJ 10 yJ lyJ
em! fuer I
10° 107 10° 10° 10° 10° кг? 10 1 10!
A photon of free-space wavelength Ло = | ит has frequency и = 300 THz, period T = 3.33 fs, and energy E = 1.24 eV = 199 zJ = 104 ст-1.
At room temperature (T = 300° К), the thermal energy kT = 26 meV = 4.14 zJ = 209 ст-1.
OPTICAL PULSES
Pulse ATTOSECOND ОРС | || FEMTOSECOND OPTICS 8 | PICOSECOND OPTICS |
width 10 as 100 as 1 fs 10 fs 100 fs I ps 10 ps 100 ps I ns 10 ns
Pulse
length ст | | |
10 пт 100 nm Тим 10 ум 100 рт Imm lcm 10 cm Im
Spectral
width | |
=— Ди
10 PHz 1 PHz 100 THz 10 THz 1 THz 100 GHz 10 GHz 1 GHz 100 MHz
PHOTONIC STRUCTURES
MOLECULAR |) NANOPHOTONICS ||) MICRO-OPTICS | | BULK OPTICS
Size
— Ш
0.1 А 1A lnm 10 nm 100 nm 1 им 10 ит 100 jum 1mm lcm 10 ст lm

Fundamentals of Photonics, Third Edition is a self-contained and up-to-date
introductory-level textbook that thoroughly surveys this rapidly expanding area
of engineering and applied physics. Featuring a blend of theory and applica-
tions, coverage includes detailed accounts of the primary theories of light,
including ray optics, wave optics, electromagnetic optics, and photon
optics, as well as the interaction of light with matter. Presented at increasing
levels of complexity, preliminary sections build toward more advanced topics,
such as Fourier optics and holography, photonic-crystal optics, fiber and
guided-wave optics, LEDs and lasers, acousto-optic and electro-optic
devices, nonlinear optical devices, ultrafast optics, optical interconnects
and switches, and optical fiber communications. The third edition features an
entirely new chapter on the optics of metals and plasmonic devices. Each
chapter contains highlighted equations, exercises, problems, summaries, and
selected reading lists. Examples of real systems are included to emphasize the
concepts governing applications of current interest. Each of the chapters of the
second edition has been thoroughly updated.

has been Distinguished Professor and Dean of
CREOL, The College of Optics and Photonics at the University of Central Florida,
since 2009. He is also Professor Emeritus at Boston University. Saleh is the
author of Photoelectron Statistics and Introduction to Subsurface Imaging, and is
the Founding Editor of Advances in Optics and Photonics. He is a Fellow of APS,
IEEE, OSA, and SPIE, and is the recipient of the OSA Beller Medal, the OSA
Mees Medal, the SPIE BACUS Award, and the Kuwait Prize.

is Professor Emeritus at Boston University and
Columbia University, and a member of the Boston University Photonics Center.
He is the coauthor of Fractal-Based Point Processes and is a Fellow of the IEEE,
OSA, SPIE, APS, AAAS, and ASA. He is the recipient of the IEEE Browder J.
Thompson Memorial Prize Award, the IEEE Morris E. Leeds Award, the Memorial
Gold Medal of Palacky University, and the Distinguished Scholar Award of
Boston University.
WILEY

WILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook
EULA.
